[Music]
hey everyone welcome to the Peter Atia
drive I'm your host Peter Atia the drive
is a result of my hunger for optimizing
performance health longevity critical
thinking along with a few other
obsessions along the way I've spent the
last several years working with some of
the most successful top performing
individuals in the world and this
podcast is my attempt to synthesize what
I've learned along the way to help you
live a higher quality more fulfilling
life if you enjoy this podcast you can
find more information on today's episode
and other topics at Peter via MD com
hello everyone welcome to this week's
episode of the Peter Athiya drive my
guest this week is Professor Tom
Seyfried who many of you will know but I
suspect an equal number of you will not
know tom has come to us through many
channels meaning the requests to speak
with Tom have come on many levels
there's been a lot of requests through
social media through the site and of
course based on our discussions with dom
D'Agostino tom has been friend of mine
for quite a while this is my first time
meeting Tom but I feel sort of like I
know him because I've read so much of
his work and Bob Kaplan who of course
you all know as my trusty right-hand guy
who lives in Boston actually takes a
course from Tom and he's taken a course
in the past and continues to just wander
around Tom's office and just hang out
with him overall so in some ways this
felt kind of familiar though it was my
first time meeting Tom Tom's background
is that he's got a PhD in genetics and
biochemistry from the University of
Illinois got that in the mid 70s and a
bunch of other distinctions that I'm not
gonna go into because we're gonna link
to all that stuff he did his postdoc in
the Department of Neurology at Yale and
it was there that he first became
interested in ketones because of their
application in the amelioration of
recalcitrant seizures as we get into in
the disc in the episode that led to his
interest in cancer which is now his
focus Tom has published over 150
peer-reviewed publications he's the
author of
numerous books textbooks etc including
kind of treatise on this so his magnum
opus is effectively a book called cancer
as a metabolic disease I probably got my
first copy of this a few years ago and
in many ways that's what sort of felt
quite familiar in speaking with him he's
currently a professor at Boston College
and his research today focuses on the
mechanisms by which metabolic therapies
can manage chronic diseases such as
epilepsy neurodegenerative lipid storage
diseases and above all cancer in this
episode we talk about Tom's background
as I sort of alluded to his work in
epilepsy and how that led him to the
interest in caloric restriction and
ketosis we revisit the man the legend
Otto Warburg and talk about the Warburg
effect and Warburg's point of view on
these things and I I do push him a
little bit on this because I want to
point out that it's not entirely clear
amongst people what the Warburg effect
really implies and how ubiquitous it is
and I have to be honest with you I don't
necessarily share Tom's views on a
number of these things so I wanted to do
my best to sort of represent as many
other views as possible but at the same
time I hope the discussion is helpful we
get into a bunch of the semantics I knew
this was a very technical topic and I
know that not everybody has the luxury
of listening to this while they're
reviewing the show notes so we do go
over the difference between respiration
or oxidative phosphorylation and
fermentation it's very important to
understand this so one thing to keep in
mind with this podcast and frankly any
of the more technical episodes we do if
you're struggling with a concept hit
pause I don't think it's worth sort of
going through these not understanding
them I think it's cool to listen to this
hit pause go back hit Wikipedia ping us
with a question on social media or
whatever if there's a concept that's
dumping you but this is obviously going
to be one of the more important concepts
if you can't understand the difference
between respiration oxidative
phosphorylation as it were and
fermentation that a lot of this won't
make sense we also get into this idea of
substrate level phosphorylation a very
important concept and the fermentation
of glucose we also talked a lot about
glutamine this is something that I
haven't spent a lot of time talking
about in the past I think I do touch on
it a little bit with Dom D'Agostino but
we get into it in much greater fashion
and we of course get into Ultima
we the fundamental question that I think
people who are interested in metabolic
therapies for questions have to be able
to answer which is is cancer primarily a
metabolic disease meaning a disease
whose origin arrives in the mitochondria
or in the metabolic machinery of the
cell or is it primarily a genetic
disease where sometimes you will and
sometimes you won't sustain
mitochondrial damage now I have to you
know and you'll see this in the
interview it's not entirely clear to me
that I buy the argument that cancer is
entirely a metabolic disease though as
some of you will know I am very bullish
on the use of metabolic therapies in
cancer but I'm also very bullish on the
use of immunotherapy in cancer and when
appropriate chemotherapy in cancer so
you know my view is that cancer is about
as hard disease as there is ever going
to be to target and therefore we ought
to turn our attention to as many legs of
the stool as possible and not just one
I think the discussion gets a little bit
heated at one point when I take issue
with something Tom said about suggesting
that biopsies could exacerbate cancer I
I really don't want anybody to come out
of this believing that having a biopsy
is going to increase their risk of
metastatic cancer I think that anyone's
entitled to a hypothesis but to my
knowledge there are absolutely no
evidence to support that claim we talk a
lot about a particular type of cancer
called glioblastoma multiforme a GBM
also known as a grade four astrocytoma
this is of course a cancer that if you
haven't heard of it you've certainly
heard of its effect john mccain who
recently passed away suffered from this
I lost a friend to this when I was
younger and I think that if you know
somebody who has died of brain cancer
the chances are there's that there's a
pretty good chance this is the cancer
they had this is one of those cancers
that gives cancer a bad name and in all
fairness I don't think there's ever been
a true document and survivor of this
cancer it also may provide one of the
more interesting model systems to study
metabolic therapies for cancer I guess
the most important thing we close with
is I sort of pushed home a little bit on
what experiment he would want to see or
do to advance the thinking in this field
in many ways Tom's a little bit of a guy
that's on the sidelines of you know sort
of mainstream cancer these views these
metabolic fuels unfortunately
unfortunately in my view don't get the
attention they deserve and other people
that I'm going to be talking with in the
future such as Sid Mukherjee and Lou
Cantley are going to be some I think
some of the people who are now starting
to see through their own research some
of the potential applications for these
things and so I think that in many ways
the problems that Tom has been working
on for the last 30 or 40 years are very
slowly beginning to gain acceptance and
I don't like to use the word mainstream
but in I think you know what I mean in
the more mainstream circles of oncology
this interview does get technical at
times and so as is the case with
virtually all of our interviews please
pay attention to the show notes if
you're having difficulty if for no other
reason than the fact that a heck of a
lot of work goes into preparing them on
the part of our analytical team if you
like this podcast I would ask a few very
kindly to go and leave a review at
iTunes and I suppose if you don't like
this podcast you can also do that lastly
if you are interested in receiving a
weekly email which comes out every
Sunday morning from me that usually
talks about something I've done that
week something I've learned that week
something that is hopefully of interest
to you by all means sign up for that at
Peter attea MD com and I think that's
pretty much all I want to say as we go
into this so with that said please give
it up for my guest today dr. Tom c3 hey
Tom how are you well thank you very much
well thank you so much for making time I
know you've got a long lineup of
students outside your office here who
are kind of pissed at me for sitting
here taking up time when you could be
answering their questions so they'll
recover you know a lot of people have
been sort of reaching out to me on
social media and saying you know you've
got to have Tom on you've got to have
Tom on you know the podcast with Don was
excellent but there's so much more we
want to understand about cancer and you
know certainly cancer something near and
dear to my heart I did my fellowship in
oncology and but at the same time I
think I understand cancer far less than
I understand things that I didn't
formally trained and like I think I have
a better understand
for example of heart disease than I do
of cancer so I'm really excited to
explore a lot of topics today and
acknowledge that we probably won't even
scratch the surface of all that you
think about but all that said how did
you get interested in this we started it
when I was at Yale University Department
of Neurology where we have been working
on epilepsy and lipid storage diseases
and ganglia sites basically is it
complex lipid molecules and one of the
individuals that I was working with that
time Robert you he's my was my mentor at
the time he had done some research on
ganglia side changes in tumors and you
know we had been looking at that and I
said you know there was some interesting
molecules in those tumor cells so I also
knew Dennis Spencer who was the chief in
the neurosurgery at the time at Yale and
he said why don't you come up to the
operating room with me and I'll get you
a nice piece of glioblastoma from a
patient you know you know I'm a basic
scientist I'm not a clinician I don't
know what's going on so I said sure he
come into the operating room and was
kind of an experience that I'll never
forget having someone take a a tumor out
of someone's head and they were asking
me all kinds of questions like you know
do you think we should do rate put
pellets of radiation in the cavity and
you know all this kind of stuff and so I
didn't know what I said I'm here to look
at the ganglia sight pattern in the
tumor heads read the cancer or anything
like this but any event we had then
started making our own brain tumors in
the mouse based on the work of Harry
Zimmerman who started the first school
of neuropathology in the United States
at Yale University in the back in the
1930s and he was still alive at the time
he lived to be 98 years old or something
so I I was interested in doing
comparative studies of glycolipids in
human and mouse brain tumors to see
whether or not we can come to some
common changes and that's how we got
started pretty much looking at
comparative biochemical profiles between
human tumors and mouse tumors and there
was some similarities but there were
many differences as well but we didn't
get into the kind of therapeutic
evaluation of these tumors and so we all
said a huge program in epilepsy mapping
genes for epilepsy we did a lot of
things that yeah
he's working on the glycolipids of the
tumors glycolipids a developing brain
lipid storage diseases and epilepsy and
I wrote a grant it for internally at
Yale which was rejected asking about
ketogenic diets and what year was this
is back in the slate 70s early 80s maybe
1980 and they said oh nobody's
interested in ketogenic diets it's kind
of passe this was before the work at
Hopkins or yeah Hopkins John Freeman was
a friend of mine too who was the
Godfather of ketogenic diets he was the
one that saved Jim Abraham's son Charlie
mm-hmm and Jim was a movie director and
his friend meryl streep made the movie
first do no harm which was based on in
part on Jim's experience with his son
but I wasn't connected at that time to
Abrams or any of that stuff that was
even before the Charlie foundation I
just had this inkling that maybe
ketogenic diet would be interesting to
test against some of the epilepsy models
that I was working with but does that
mean you suspected that something to do
with glucose metabolism no nothing I
just thought it was an interesting
approach to a non drug approach for for
seizures and anyway the grant was
summarily rejected so I said well
nobody's interested in this so I left
Yale and I came up to Boston College
here start a program and then we were
here from then it was twenty ten years
fifteen years later we developed some of
the best animal models for epilepsy and
we were looking at brains of
biochemistry and epileptic seizures and
the genes that caused epilepsy and then
one of my PhD students Marianna Tran
says oh they're having a big meeting out
in Washington on ketogenic diets for
epilepsy and maybe our model would be
appropriate for this I said now this is
you know I said after my experience at
Yale I said nobody's interested in this
crap you're still traumatized you know I
got a sore marrow Lee reject and says
this is nobody interested in nuclear
Janet diets so anyway I she said holy
man like that so I said I had a few
extra bucks in the grant so I said okay
go on out in fact she she wrote a little
blurb and they funded her to go out
there so she comes back and starts
telling me about
Wow you can't believe what I saw out
there all these guys are interested in
this ketogenic diet and and this guy Jim
Abrams and he stalking us to start this
foundation called the Charly foundation
and it was like to study epilepsy and
ketogenic diets and stuff so I said all
right what the hell so we started to put
them on the mice and it was funny
because we didn't know what we were
doing but then at the same time it was
two things came together at the same
time we were studying gangly slides for
lipid storage diseases if there was a
drug company over in England that gave
us this new drug that was supposed to
stop gangly aside synthesis and
therefore reduced the storage in the in
the brain of course at at that time at
Boston College animal they didn't charge
me for animals which they do now which
is a tragedy because you can really do a
lot of work the damn mice cost so much
money and there were so fewer
restrictions I mean we'd followed all of
the animal care protocols but we we had
access to a large number so we could do
experiments that you couldn't do
anywhere else so when we got the drug
from the company we were feeding the
drug to them to the mice and we looked
at the ganglia so yeah it's really down
but so was the body weight and then when
we put the control group in we found out
that the yeah the tumors shrunk and the
ganglia sides were reduced from this
drug but then the body weight was also
reduced and these the controls were also
there both animals being fed ad lib ad
libitum one had the drug one didn't okay
so the drugs somehow either reduced
intake or increased expended we don't
know but it's the body weights were
reduced by about 15 or 20 percent so and
the tumors were significantly reduced by
about 50 60 percent so I told the
company that you know I just threw them
on I just did a pilot study I told the
company that your drug seems to really
shrink brain tumors they go why this is
this is a much bigger market than say
tay-sachs disease right so that's when
they gave me $200,000 to investigate the
mechanism by which their drug was
stopping brain cancer because I showed
them the data and they what they were
all excited so we then began to
investigate this in Pernambuco Jima dr.
mukajee who worked started with me I
said hey partner by me I hired her
specifically to start looking at this
and then when we realized that um you
know what's what's working she said you
know a lot of times these drugs work
through calorie restriction so I said
well why don't we put a control group we
all decided let's put a control group
for body weights and then we just won
one was the guys with the drug and
losing weight the other guys would just
take the food away from them so the body
weights would be absolutely identical so
they were pair fat pad wasn't pair fat
one one group was eating ad libitum and
they were losing body weight and the
other group oh I see you took a guess
we had to restrict the calories to match
to match the body weight were their pair
we did yesterday waited yes
Ida waited and then we evaluated this
and the tumors were exactly the same
size so it had nothing to do with the
drug even though the drug was working on
the target and molecule
it wasn't the targeted molecule that was
was responsible for this so that's when
we also decided with the epilepsy
overlapping does the categorize the
ketogenic diet work through calorie
restriction because many of these
children that get ketogenic diets they
have a very restricted calories and you
have to you have to give very small you
can't let kids eat massive amounts of
fat because invariably John Freeman told
me it doesn't think the diet doesn't
work if they just fight one out of two
or three hundred kids just loves to eat
all this fat and they then the seizures
don't go away
so we in other words the the thinking at
the time was there is some amount of
caloric restriction that is necessary
within the context of the ketosis to
also affect the epileptic seizures yes
absolutely
but you have to be very careful because
many of these children are on the growth
spurt so you have to be careful on how
much restriction you give and the other
thing of course it's self restricted
there's several physiological systems in
our body that when you eat a lot of fat
you just don't need a lot of calories
yeah it's a turn-off it works through
the vagus nerve the hormone
cholecystokinin is kind of an appetite
suppressor it affects the vagus nerve
which then stops the appetite you don't
eat as much so I have so many stories so
I was sitting on a bus one day you're on
the right podcast on time restriction
yeah I listen so they made this thing
called the vagal nerve stimulator and it
was made by a company I can't remember
the name of it made fortune they would
implant the stimulator into the person's
who has epilepsy and it would send out
things to stimulate the vagus nerve and
I was sitting on the bus with this guy
from
Norway and he says I said you putting
this in the patient yeah we sort of
putting this in the patient how does it
work yeah it seems to work really good I
said how much is it he says well it's
the operation is like four thousand
dollars but the device it was like
fifteen or sixteen thousand dollars but
there was putting them in all these
epileptic patients and their work I saw
does it work he's I don't know but it
works so I said I didn't know I'm
sitting on the bus I don't know we're
going to MGM studios down in Florida
they closed the whole place down in the
middle of the week in December so that
they they could attract all the all the
epileptologist to use their device to
put into these patients you know is one
of these kind of things so anyway comes
back when we were working on ketogenic
diets and calorie restriction you know
we realized that humans have this
internal system to stop calories and if
you don't stop the calories and variably
you don't get the management of the
seizures so we in our in our parallel
studies in epilepsy with mice and cancer
and all this other stuff you know we
started to learn what's going what's
working in the patients how do we
translate what's working in the patients
into the mice the mice can be another
source of information that we can feed
back and we published this big paper on
calorie restriction and key to it was
well that the ketogenic diet was working
largely through calorie restriction and
maintaining low blood sugar levels was
the key to maintaining control of
seizures now if you had a I don't if you
did this experiment but if you took
animals on an equally low caloric diet
that was not ketogenic so let's just say
a very high carbohydrate low fat diet
where presumably glucose levels would be
higher even though they would still be
calorically restricted would you get the
same anti-seizure benefit the same
results exactly so because what was
happening is that when the body is
restricted of calories you then make
ketones so the level of ketosis was also
seen in the cow it was be like a human
doing what are only fasting so how
calorically restricted did they need to
be if they were not on a ketogenic 40
percent thirty to five to forty percent
restriction and then we did some studies
another group we found out that 35 to 40
percent restriction of calories in the
mouse equates to a water only
therapeutic fasting in humans and that's
because the their metabolism is right is
seven or eight times higher than that of
so humans can achieve much higher
ketosis than a mouse can and the mouse
so one week one day water-only fast and
a mouse is like a seven-day water only
fast in a human and the blood sugars go
down the ketones go on IR bees don't
allow you to fast mice that long anymore
do that oh yeah I'm as long as they as
long as they're healthy
you know calorie restriction is
generally a healthy thing if you you
don't want to over restrict because then
you put into a nutritional imbalance and
you don't want to go to the level of
what we call starvation this is another
calorie restriction is healthy up to the
point where you start breaking down
muscle if you start breaking down muscle
then you enter into a new physiological
state called starvation and that's a
that's very pathological you don't ever
want to go to that digression so some
people that like they get so carried
away with with water only fasting they
can enter into starvation mode I know
this for a fact because I used to spend
a lot of time with George Cahill we used
to run the Joslin Diabetes centers down
here in Boston and he and I would talk
for hours and hours with Bud Veatch at
the NIH about how long people can go
with this transition over from
therapeutic fasting into starvation and
also the body bills it's like anything
your body gets accustomed you can go a
long time without eating if you're if
you're in shape you know if you've done
this but you know it depends on what
your body weight is what your how old
you are it depends on a lot of different
things how long you can go without
eating but you know the bottom line is
that you won't we were trying to develop
a therapy and figure out the mechanisms
by which ketogenic diets were
therapeutic now going back to the Cahill
stuff for a moment before we come back
to that did you have a sensor to George
have a sense of when those patients are
in a negative nitrogen balance and I
assume it matters as to what their
starting weight is and muscle mass and
things like that but there were there
general rules about once you cross over
that point where you're basically you
know pulling nitrogen out of the muscle
right right and he got that those data
actually from the 10 guys that starved
to death and Mays Mays prison inning in
Northern Ireland Bobby Sands in that
group actually he was there monitoring
their blood work well it was dying of
starvation these were prisoners that
they were fasting as a protest yeah
correct yeah them they made a movie out
of it every mother's son about that
there was ten Irishmen that were how
long did they live on average they
averaged I think he had the data he was
never able to publish it the British
government was on top of him about that
but he was able to collect the data and
shared some of that stuff and it was
very interested - horrible thing it's
like one of the worst ways to dies is
starvation so what happens your
diaphragm is the last muscle that will
be digested and there's a there's a
momentum that starts now you have to
realize that these guys that did this so
they don't die of just acidosis
there's the it's actually the diagram
they're drowned in your own body fluids
basically jeez it's brutal so because
what happens is once your diaphragm
can't work your lungs fill up with with
fluids and you drowned in your own
fluids and the diaphragm presumably
stops working because of either the loss
of muscle or the electrolyte imbalance
yeah both the combination of both so and
then there's a moment you can't stop it
once once the momentum
it's like these horrible hiccups right
yeah yeah well it's it's um once the
momentum starts it seems like they try
to do an intervention on a couple of the
guys and they weren't able to to reverse
it so it was pretty horrific now those
guys were all young Irishman you know in
their 20s and 30s
I don't know what the oldest guy was but
but they lived from I don't know 68 to
85 90 days without any food just water
but then he subsequently fasted these
very obese people for 40 days longer for
six months eight months oh wow yeah he
has the data one guy who post men lost
his job weight 450 pounds or something
couldn't deliver the mail so they put
him on the water only fasting for six
months I think six or eight months guy
lost 250 pounds this is different from
the guy who there was a there was a
single case report of a patient who
weighed a little over 400 pounds and did
a 382 day fast yeah but I didn't realize
that was cahill that was over I don't
know that was Cahill there was another
couple of them okay but he was
overseeing he showed us the data on this
one guy the postman and you know and the
issue of course is I don't know if he
took many supplements because
body-fat holds a lot of vitamins fat
soluble vitamins the minerals come from
your bones the liver control holds an
awful lot of B vitamins and things like
this I think there was supplemented a
weren't you don't you need a lot of
supplements your body holds over we
evolved as a species to starve I mean
our existence today is dependent on our
ability to go long periods of time
without eating that anymore but but yeah
yeah and it seems that our ability to
access minerals and vitamins is highly
dependent on our nutritional state in
other words your need for those things
tends to go up in a fed state yeah at
least according to some research I've
seen yeah you're right and our ancestors
were hardened people you know their
bodies were already acclimated to a
starvation mode so they were very
efficient in maintaining mineral and
nutrient balances I think in our society
today and this is purely speculation I
think a lot of the foods are depleted in
the kinds of nutrients that we would
need there forward some people are
almost like in a starvation mode but
they're eating food that has no
nutritional value and consequently you
you store a lot of fat because the body
doesn't usually get rid of sugar you
know as I said sugar is stored it's not
you know pee out sugar unless you have
type 1 diabetes or something the body
has all these filtration systems to keep
carbs in which is then transferred to
fat and stored as fat that's our energy
to keep us alive when there's no food
but all these ideas and things were
developing when we were doing the
Epilepsy studies then it became clear
that calorie restriction was a key form
a key mechanism by which the ketogenic
diet was working and we have since then
seen and numerous children with epilepsy
that breakthrough seizures will occur
when blood sugar spikes define spike in
that very specific case how high does it
need to be in milligrams per deciliter
Pepsi there's many cases where it just
has to go a little bit above the
baseline so kids will have a very low 70
68 65 milligrams per dekaliter
they'll grab a cupcake at a party or
whatever and spikes up to 120 or
whatever and then you'll get a
breakthrough seizure and do you believe
that it is
is the absolute value of 120 in that
case or do you believe it's the D by DT
like the meaning the rate of change you
have we can't know that it hasn't been
done effectively all we know is from the
clinicians and the nurses that have told
me all this information and of course
when your child has a breakthrough
seizure nobody likes to see a kid
seizing I mean it's very it's traumatic
you know it's it's not that's not a
pleasant thing so once they realize that
the kids have to maintain this very
stable the parents are very very
restrictive of these kids so because
they don't want to see their child
seized so they're very restrictive so
when we do the same thing for cancer
about the problem with cancer is you
don't see a breakthrough seizure you
don't see a group of tumor cells
starting to grow faster you don't see
the immediate effects but they're there
but you just can't see them with
epilepsy you have a very visible clear
indication that something went wrong and
and unvarying as a spike in glucose now
what's very interesting is in these kids
they could be maintained for months
without a single seizure and then one
drink of a grape juice or whatever the
hell boom
breakthrough seizure within sometimes
minutes from the time you took the so
it's a very they can flip back but then
they can also get back on track again
they don't have a large number of
seizures they can just they can get back
on track but it's very very sensitive
system in our brains
then as John Tommy John Freeman he says
we don't understand that if a kid is
maintained seizure free or minimal
seizures for long periods of time on
ketogenic diets and then we removed the
diet they they seem to be managed in
other words they don't return to their
multiple seizures that they would have
had every day so he doesn't know if it
was because the diet did something
fundamental or they outgrew the seizure
or it was again these are areas in
epilepsy that are under active
investigation by a lot but it's
interesting it's almost like a reset
right I mean one of the things that
impressed me about reading the case
studies of these very very long fasts is
that in the reports that are published
several years later many of the subjects
maintain their new weight reduced state
yeah which is a bit counterintuitive
based on what we know today about
you know traditional dieting approach is
where everybody's sort of you know will
return back to baseline and so it begs a
question right when you starve this
person for six months do they completely
change the way they eat on the other
side but because of a behavioral shift
or is it a physiologic shift meaning
their metabolisms been kind of
quote/unquote fixed yeah well I think
it's probably a combination of both I
mean again these are very complicated
physiological processes you know they
call it the thrifty gene that was a term
it's not one gene it's like the thrifty
physiology if you do yo-yo dieting give
me you can be screwed up for a long
period of time those things all have
loose ends there's nothing that we have
found that it's absolutely consistent in
all patients all the time when it comes
to those kinds of things and that's why
they're always interesting to talk about
because someone always has some new
people new idea about something that
they've seen kind of fits in a little
bit with what everybody else is
I don't really dwell engage in those
kinds of things as far as our research
is concerned you know we know about them
we talk about them but we don't other
than the calorie restriction that we
introduced into the mice and then when
we found out that the calorie
restriction and the ketogenic diets were
working so people say well why don't you
just do calorie restriction because you
know cancer it back to cancer we don't
like to restrict the term restriction I
even the term let's read already got a
disease now you have to be restricted
you know it's like so ketogenic diets
are a little takes this thing out of a
therapeutic fast and they can also
replicate some of the same physiological
changes the key is to lower the blood
sugar and elevate the ketones and that's
what ketogenic diets do for managing
epilepsy and they do the same thing for
cancer the issue of course is we don't
know the mechanism by which lowering
glucose and elevating ketones is
responsible for the management of the
seizure this is under an active
investigation by a lot of labs that
actual mechanism is that the elevation
of the ketones is the reduction of the
glucose or is it some combination of the
two but for cancer it becomes very clear
the mechanism of action is very clear
for how this kills cancer cells it's
based on Otto Warburg theory so
when we started to do this and realize
that calorie restriction was shrinking
these tumors down massively you know
based on the drug that I told you about
because it was working through calorie
restriction then I said you know how is
calorie restriction stopping tumors and
then we realized that it was lowering
blood sugar so we started measuring
blood sugar in these calorie restricted
mice and measuring ketones and we were
seeing that we were getting these major
shifts and then we said you know then it
became clear who was the guy who did
this or thought about it was Warburg now
he wasn't doing ketogenic diets had he
done and known about that I think he
would have been able to crack this
cancer thing far far earlier than it he
didn't do keto Jenny thing about that so
let's back up for a moment for people I
mean I think most people listening
probably know what the Warburg effect is
and and and who Warburg was but maybe
just give us a moment of setting the
stage for what he what his observation
was that now bears his name
well his interest was in biochemistry he
was a classical chemist biochemist and
his in his time and he began to look at
the metabolism of tumors so he made an
observation which was solidified that
cancer cells continued to do a ancient
fermentation metabolism even in the
presence of oxygen so this the posture
effect from Louis Pasteur with the yeast
was that you know yeast will ferment
they evolved that organism evolved to be
able to ferment get energy in the
absence of oxygen but when as soon as
oxygen came into the the presence they
stopped fermenting and they immediately
started respiring they have a system
that can do that so the Pasteur effect
was basically the termination of
fermentation and the presence of oxygen
that was the pasture effect and and it
was repeated in all these yeast strains
of this kind of thing and that was a
fundamental biochemical advancement so
to say but Warburg recognized he knew
Posterous worked very very well and then
he said geez these cancer cells man they
they continue to throw out lactic acid
even in the presence of a hundred
percent oxygen so he grew cancer cells
in 100% oxygen and they would still
making lactic acid so clearly the pact
the Pasteur effect wasn't working I'll
just interject for a moment to explain
something to the listener and we'll
probably have a picture of this but of
course you take glucose too
pyruvate in the cytoplasm right and
that's a you know that yields a couple
of units of ATP and then you have sort
of a choice of what you're going to do
with that pyruvate if your demand for
ATP is incredibly quick usually
exceeding the capacity of oxygen to get
into the cell you'll make lactate and
that's also relatively inefficient
meaning you don't get that much more ATP
I think you get another two molecules of
ATP per unit of pyruvate but at least
you have the advantage of saying I'm not
limited by oxygen alternatively if you
if oxygen is plentiful and more
importantly if the demand for ATP is not
excessive
you can shuttle that pyruvate into
acetyl co a in the mitochondria and you
can generate over 30 units of ATP right
and so what you're saying is there was
an observation which said hey if I put
this cell in the presence of lots of
oxygen it really shouldn't make much
lactate right and that's what he finds
when you take normal tissue like kidney
slices or muscle slices or or liver
you'd grow them and 100% oxygen and they
produce minimal - barely detectable
lactate there's always some going to be
produced in every tissue but basically
it's a very minimal very minimal but the
cancer cell continues to dump out
massive amounts of lactic acid even in
the presence of 100% oxygen so this was
a phenomena he saw this over and over
again it didn't make any difference
whether it was a human tumor or a mouse
to him a rat tumor they were all doing
this same kind of thing
so what he concluded from this was that
their respiratory system was defective
because like you just said if pi root
now that's the M then Meyerhoff pathway
going from from glucose to pyruvate
pyruvate is the end of the meijer is the
end of that so then the opportunity is
that the primate would enter into the
mitochondria oxygenating conditions and
be fully oxidized to water and co2 and
oxygen is the acceptor of the electrons
to form the water and the carbons are
coming from the foods that we
metabolized but the cancer cell was
dumping out large amounts of this lactic
acid so why would a cancer cell dump out
lactic acid and it became clear to
Warburg through a variety of experiments
that the respiratory system was
defective in these cells let's just
clarify that many people when they hear
that Willis we think respiratory system
we think of lungs what you really mean
is the mitochondrial right right
machinery that undergoes what we call
cellular respiration the lungs are
bringing in the oxygen and getting rid
of the co2 the right enables and enables
all the cell's and a majority of
ourselves in the body to perform this
very efficient form of energy production
which then frees up the cells to do
their sophisticated behaviors liver
cells do what they do kidney cells brain
cells they all do what they do because
they have this very efficient energetic
system that's the working called
respiration the lungs are just the
facilitators of the body to get the get
the good air in and the bad air out and
so basically the cancer cell was
continuing to produce massive amounts of
lactic acid despite the fact that there
was all this so he was then looking at
the mitochondria knowing it noticing
that there were some defects and these
kinds of things but he wasn't at the
level of electron microscopy or this he
just made the what year this is in the
1920s mostly late 20s 30s 40s all the
way up to the 50 I think he stopped his
research maybe in the early 60s now he
won a Nobel Prize didn't he
yeah he was at for the description of
this phenomenon no it was forced to
discovery of cytochrome C oxidase which
is actually one of the key enzymes in
the electron transport chain how cells
generate energy through respiration so
he he was nominated other times and
there's still some controversy about how
many times he had been nominated for the
work on cancer but never to achieve
another Nobel Prize but he was
considered one of the dominant
biochemists in the 20th century and he
had very strong ideas and very excellent
quantitative measurements for this a lot
of his work was reproduced by dozens and
dozens of scientists so that was the
fundamental observation but he then
extended this to the theory that why are
this the cells are producing all this
lactic acid because the organelle that
is is supposed to be involved is
defective this led to a lot of
controversy what do you mean defect how
defective what do you mean so much later
Pete Peterson from
Hopkins had done a magnificent job in
collating all this information and he
found that in every kind of a cancer
cell no matter what kind of it is there
was some defect in the number structure
or function of the mitochondria and it
could vary so some cancer cells have
very few mitochondria but they look
normal very few of them other tumor
cells clearly have a lot of mitochondria
but they look abnormal so whatever it
was it was something to do with an
impairment of the respiratory system
within the cell and if the cell can't
generate energy through normal
respiration then it has to ferment
there's no other way they can get the
energy so it became that the Warburg
effect which everybody talks about is
one of the biggest problems in this
whole thing because Warburg and his
paper clearly said that aerobic
glycolysis or what they call the Warburg
effect is a secondary problem
that's subjected to many many variances
in the environment but everybody focuses
on this is it the real issue is the
damage to their respiration and
everybody says no respiration is normal
and cancer cells and why would they say
it's normal because they started doing
cells in culture rather than looking at
the tissues themselves and once you
start doing culture work that you're
taking cells from a tissue and
separating them and growing them as if
they were microorganisms in a culture
dish well this changes everything
they're no longer connected to each
other they're growing in some artificial
fluid and they're doing things that they
sometimes do and sometimes not do in the
real world so you make a lot of
assumptions about things based on a
system that itself is artefactual so let
me ask a couple of technical questions
obviously measuring the amount of
lactate or hydrogen ion that's produced
is a way to give us an indication of how
much anaerobic metabolism is taking
place what if you're if you're not in
cell culture how do you quantify the
amount of aerobic respiration you look
at the amount of oxygen consumed and the
amount of lactic acid produced so if
you're doing aerobic respiration you're
consuming a lot of lactic acid a lot of
oxygen and producing very little lactate
and then you can quantitate the amount
of ATP being produced per millimeter
mili liter of oxygen that you consume
and according to this this can vary from
anywhere from 7-7 ATP units denying
depending on the system but it's you
know Warburg used to work the number
seven based on his dad at that time so
you could calculate the total amount of
ATP being produced in the cell based on
its oxygen consumption and select the
gassed at production and Warburg did he
ever do this insight you yes he did it
in sluttin slices and then he did it in
cell culture as well so he created some
of his own his own problems as well
switching from one to the other the
concern that I that we have now is that
many kept many cells in culture look
like they're consuming a lot of oxygen
so and they're making lactic acid but
they're consuming a lot of oxygen so
thank you suggesting that they're doing
both which is still a bit odd yeah right
well that was Sidney Winehouse's
argument his argument was the cancer
cell needs so much energy that
respiration by itself can't be
sufficient so they have to ferment and
respire at the same time and that made
everybody feel that yeah Warburg was
wrong they do have good respiration but
they just need so much more energy they
need to ferment at the same time but the
work from Pete Peterson showed that they
have defective respiration so I mean
they have defective mitochondria
structure number and function besides
many other studies have shown so you
know that they can't be doing oxidative
phosphorylation or respiration because
they're very organelle that is needed
for that is deficient in some way and
that could be many different ways as I
said there's no one all cancer cells all
cancer cells have a defect in
respiration how that defect came about
can vary from one from one type of
cancer to another so one has to
recognize that so not every cancer cell
will have the exact same defect in
respiration in the mitochondria some
will have very few mitochondria okay so
they just don't have quantitatively
enough organelles to do respect
respiration but what seems to be there
seems to be functional - partially
functional other cells as I said are
loaded with mitochondria but when you
look at them they're morphologically
abnormal so structure dictates function
in biology we know that structure
dictates function so if the structure of
the organelle is abnormal you know that
the function of that organelle is not
going to be normal and is the idea that
those those mutations were acquired I
wouldn't call them mutations they would
call them defects now
you can't have other words the genome is
unaffected in some of those cases yes
we've done we've done that we sequenced
the entire genome of five different
independently derived cancers from mouse
alder all derived from different origins
and we didn't find a single genetic
abnormality
pather what we call pathogenic where
were yet where the mutation would
actually have an effect on a function
and we didn't find a single one so that
that's all let's think maybe take a step
back and for the listener again we'll go
over some is the basics of genetics
because I think that for many people
there's an understanding that I mean by
definition a cancer has a mutation that
renders it incapable of listening to
normal cell signaling do you have a
sense broadly of what amount of human
cancers arise from germline mutations
rather than somatic mutations it's
obviously very small but I don't know
what the number is well they say it's
about five to six percent oh is that
high okay you know and you hear about
them the Braca one yeah records who
really from any p53 you know Lynch
syndrome it's yeah yeah but when we
looked into those so-called inherited
risk we call them inherited risk factors
none of them have ever been 100 percent
penetrant which means that every person
having that gene must exhaust purely
deterministic yeah they're not
deterministic and as Warburg said there
are many secondary causes of cancer but
there's only one primary cause the
primary causes the damage to the
respiratory system so if the inherited
mutation damages the respiratory system
of the cell the probability of cancer is
is a real possibility so because
everybody who has li-fraumeni tumors or
Braca one tumors or whatever they all
have they're all fermenters so the
fermentation metabolism is there in
every cancer but there are some people
that have the exact same mutation that
the other person has but they never get
the can't they never develop a tumor
because for whatever reason in that
person that mutation did not damage the
respiration now it could be an
environmental suppressive effect or
another gene in the genome that prevents
the inherited mutation from damaging the
respiration we don't know that so we
only know that you don't get cancer if
your mitochondria remain healthy that's
what we know so that's an important
because that goes back to the prevention
issue you know how do you prevent cancer
you prevent cancer by keeping your
mitochondria healthy how do you do that
well you avoid if you can avoid those
risk factors mostly from the environment
like viral infections intermittent
hypoxia radiation exposure carcinogenic
exposure all these different things
every one of those things can damage
respiration in a population of cells
then leading to cancer because we know
of no cancer that has normal respiration
but when you grow them in culture people
say yeah they have normal respiration
they've taken in oxygen so therefore our
Warburg is wrong but when you look at
the structure in the vivo and you look
at the tissues and you look at the
actual architecture of the tissue and
variable you're find damage to the
respiration damage to the structure and
function of mitochondria so what the
field has done is put more credibility
into the results from cell culture work
than into the actual tissues that people
see and look under the microscope and
look at because the Warburg effect was
largely forgotten for many years after
his initial observation right yeah a lot
of what he did was forgotten and Pete
Peterson was one of the few guys that
kept the fire burning because a lot of
it because I as I said when Watson and
Crick discovered the DNA as the origin
of the genetic material but it wasn't
only them there was a whole group of
other people that were doing it they
just weren't acknowledged as much yeah
and then the field ran off into that and
be and they also knew that there were
chromosomal abnormalities in some cancer
so it made clear that hey you know these
genomic defects and the tumor cells are
likely the real the real origin of the
disease so the whole feel more or less
shifted away from the traditional
biochemical analysis to that more
molecular biology analysis and therefore
you find more and more mutations more
and more genetic defects and all these
kinds of things leading people to
believe that these were the causes of
the disease and you know a lot of really
nice experiments were done where they
would introduce you know mutant virus
particles into cells and they would
integrate into the nuclear genome and
then you'd see the cancer cells cells
lose become transformed into a
neoplastic kind of a cell making giving
of the appearance that this was a cause
effect that if I they didn't realize
that those same viruses went into the
mitochondria and blew out the
respiration so that wasn't even
considered as possible if the viruses
are doing that presumably they're
integrating into the genome yeah well
they would do it both ways they can do
it a lot of different ways so sometimes
the viruses actually infect directly
into the mitochondria they produce
proteins in the mitochondria that screw
up the electron transport chain
other times the virus is integrated into
the nuclear genome producing a protein
product that then then disrupts them the
mitochondria either way the mitochondria
are disrupted whether it if it's a
direct effect of the virus replicating
inside the organelle or it's an effect
of a product produced by the virus so
that then goes and disrupts the
organelle and this is what we're finding
for for the majority of these situations
so even the Heritage mutations that we
look at they disrupt mitochondrial
function and if they disrupt
mitochondrial function you are at risk
for developing a neoplasm in that
particular population themselves there
are some cancers that don't follow that
correct I mean aren't there some cancers
that have normal mitochondria we haven't
found any because the evidence for that
is that they're all fermenting we
haven't found the cancer that doesn't
ferment so if the cancer is fermenting
it's obviously not respiring if it's
respiration would be normal it shouldn't
be fermenting as a matter of fact Dean
Burke did this kind of a study way back
in the 50s he went looked at have
various kinds of hepa thomas because
they were there was an article that was
published to say that there was this
very low slow growing hepatoma that did
not ferment so which was directly
related to your question but Burke who
was at the head of the NCI at the time
studied these things in massive detail
and was able to show that the slowest
growing tumor did have a significant
elevation of lactic acid production over
a normal cell but you had to look at it
really carefully and do the experiments
over extended periods of time so even
the slowest of the slowest growing
tumors guys that would be maybe
considered benign we're still making
lactic acid another another another
interesting thing was the crown gall
tumors in plants this is another
interesting plants have cancer but they
don't metastasize they just grow these
tumors and people back in the 30s with
testing Warburg's theory in these plants
and they're all had damage respiration
we're fermenting just like that just
like the mouse tumors when you say
respiration you mean photosynthetic
respiration oh no plants have both
plants can get energy from chloroplasts
to build carbohydrates but they also
have they also have my token
I didn't realize that so their carbon
fixation obviously comes from
photosynthesis yeah yeah but when they
make you know there's their equivalent
of starch yes so they will burn their
owns their own fuels to generate
respiratory energy but they also have
dysmorphic cell growth and they've
called the ground crown gall tumors you
see them sometimes on the side of trees
and things so people back in the day
analyzed the biochemistry of these
things and they also found that they
were following Warburg's metabolic
profile but they didn't metastasize and
the reason they don't metastasize is
they don't have an immune system so and
it turns out that from our work and the
work of others that the metastatic cell
is actually part of our immune system so
macrophages and leukocytes these are the
cells that have the genetic capability
of moving around the body
entering ads at tissues this is what
they do plants don't have that plants
don't have that kind of an immune system
so they don't metastasize they grow in
place but humans and other animals of
course that have these cells of the
immune system therefore they can get
metastatic cancer so before we get to
that because I do have a number of
questions about that topic another
argument that's been proposed for the
Warburg effect is the need for cellular
building blocks the other thing that the
tumor is doing above and beyond it's non
tumorous cell mate is growing and
although not necessarily faster than a
regular cell it certainly grows in a
less regulated way and therefore it's
going to proliferate so Vanderheiden and
I think Luke Antley and Craig Thompson
wrote that paper in 2009 that as I'm
sure you're familiar with there was a
science paper I believe and they
proposed this other explanation which
was look it's and it's it's not it's not
just an energetic thing in fact I don't
recall if they said it's not just or
it's not even about the energetics but
the point here was this is where you get
building blocks to make cells grow do
you think it's possible that both of
these are correct yeah well you know you
in the process of up regulating the
ended Meyerhoff pathway you are gonna
get the carbon step for building blocks
at the same time you're going to get
some energy now through the pyruvate
kinase system however it is very
interesting now this is but there they
deviate from the pay
from Warburg's theory and saying that
respiration is normal okay they think
there's nothing wrong with the
mitochondria okay they've said that many
times Craig Thompson has said this I
can't you have to ignore a massive
amount of evidence to make those kinds
of statements you just have to ignore
everything that Pete Peterson has done
which is a which is a life's work
shelfing that the mitochondria knows
yeah but he doesn't mention that and
they don't discuss pete peterson's
massive amount of evidence but you're
right it's in order for a cell to grow
you need a lot of building blocks and
you need Carmen where's the carbon
coming from this and it's coming from
both the pentose pathway and the
glycolytic pathway and it's also coming
from glutamate so these cancer cells is
sucking down glutamine so you're getting
the amide nitrogen to form the
nucleotides you're getting the glutamate
that then goes into an applause s and
the TCA cycle so between glucose and
glutamine you aren't getting all of the
building blocks that you need for rapid
cell division but where is the energy
coming from okay without energy nothing
grows nothing can live without ATP so
where is the energy coming from and this
is our thing
so we myself and Christo should not
listen and hungry I proposed this a long
time ago on a purely theoretical basis
having been convinced that Warburg was
right that the respiration of QL cancer
cells is damaged to some extent so we're
if that's the case the Warburg effect
was only the glucose part of the puzzle
it wasn't the glutamine part of the
puzzle so now with our new information
we know that most of the ATP and the
cancer is coming from substrate level
phosphorylation in the mitochondria
which is disconnected from oxidative
phosphorylation so what we have now is
the missing link info and Warburg's
basic theory so explain what SLP is
substrate level phosphorylation is the
production of ATP when you move a
phosphate group from an organic
substrate onto an ADP molecule so it's a
ancient way of generating energy in
other words it's an organic molecule
that's an electron acceptor rather than
oxygen right so instead of going through
the electron transport chain where you
use nad NADH and ADP NADPH as electron
transporters well electron donors
electron donors you can do a very quick
trick where you take an ADP
and restore it meaning it has two
phosphates you restore it to an ATP by
using an organic molecule to donate a
phosphate
well you for substrate level
phosphorylation yes yes so so sucks
Anelka way has a phosphate group on a
serine inside the protein itself and
that phosphate group is then donated to
ADP and sometimes gdp G to make gtp both
depends on the situation but in cancer
cells its ATP so you're moving phosphate
groups from an organic substrate onto
onto the onto the ADP as the acceptor
and you can generate massive amounts of
energy from that process which can
replace the level of lost energy from
oxidative phosphorylation and does that
occur inside the mitochondria inside the
inner yes inner matrix yeah it's in the
matrix uh-huh
so you're gonna be blowing out a lot of
you're gonna make a lot of eighteens
gonna just replace in the normal cell
you're making most of the ATP from
oxidative phosphorylation what in the
cancer cell you're making most of it
from substrate level phosphorylation
inside the same organelle why don't our
cells do this under demand so if we
jumped up and down and did twenty five
burpees right now we would very quickly
exceed our oxidative capacity for
respiration and we'd start making a
bunch of lactate why aren't we also
undergoing SLP well we do in the heart
muscles they do they've done various
cardiac and restrictions and things like
that a lot of this has been work down in
the heart so it does happen I mean we do
do substrate level phosphorylation but
it only can be done for short periods of
time it can't be done extensively you
can't replace oxidative phosphorylation
under normal conditions with substrate
level phosphorylation builds up I mean
this was shown by host kotka when he did
some incredibly interesting experiments
trying to hold various aquatic animals
on the water and looking at the
metabolic changes that occurred so seals
porpoises turtles and all these kinds of
things he strapped them to a board held
him underwater
and then he would measure all these
metabolites in the bloodstream now these
were animals that actually could live
underwater for if they did to us we'd
all be dead right we couldn't live that
long but five minutes at the most but
these animals could live 10 15 20
minutes being held underwater and they
weren't breathing of course now they
were stressed out because they were
strapped to a board but the bottom line
is he started measuring
all these metabolites in the bloodstream
like the gas it goes right through the
massive amount I expect that right so
and suck cynic acid suck cynic acid is
another so succinate suck cynic acid is
part of the in the electrons in the TCA
cycle is a powerful stimulant ory
towards oxidative phosphorylation and it
was being dumped out into the into the
circulation so it wasn't being oxidized
so so he claims that it was amino acid
fermentation that was doing this so the
body was grabbing amino acids and and
metabolizing them and generating energy
through substrate level phosphorylation
well it turns out the cancer cell is
doing this in a massive amount because
they don't have the oxidized so you look
at cancer cells and they're dumping out
sucks Inuk acid and sucks Innoko acid it
stabilizes if one alpha so you can
continue to the transcription factors
for driving fermentation so this whole
thing is just it's just a massive shift
from ox FASTA substrate level
phosphorylation does creatine phosphate
fit into that SLP pathway or is that
totally separate yeah I'm not sure about
that it could be a source of the
phosphate groups but I haven't looked
into that Dom but dominic may may know a
lot more about that than I do so when
you go back to sort of there's there's
an undercurrent here to what we're
talking about which is the view that you
hold is the minority view today it
sounds like just it's only it's just a
matter of time okay
why do you think that is what do you
think is the I mean I know people want
to come up with conspiracy theories and
that's sort of one of the things about
social media that I find frustrating is
people always want a conspiracy theory
to be the explanation like oh the drug
companies don't want this to be true or
something I find those things hard to
began do you think there's a better
explanation for why these hypotheses are
not being investigated with the rigor
that maybe they should be well you have
to look at the discipline of the
individuals that are working on the
project okay so most of the people doing
cancer research or molecular biologists
which they are you have that perspective
on the nature of the problem so you
don't look at respiration directly you
look at gene expression profiles that
may be directly or indirectly related to
that and then you make claims about
what's going on so most of the people
are of a discipline that says that genes
are changed and
and not looking at the actual
consumption of oxygen and like
production of lactic acid and not
looking at what Warburg actually looked
at then you have a very different
explanation for for what's happening so
a lot of people today look at use the
seahorse instrument to measure oxygen
consumption and when you put cancer
cells and tumor cells normal cells into
a dish they're all taking up oxygen
similarly and therefore Warburg must be
wrong Warburg also said that tumor cells
and normal cells will take some will
take up oxygen at the same rate except
the tumor cell is uncoupled and the
normal cell is not uncoupled which means
that the oxygen uptake in the tumor cell
is not linked directly to ATP production
people nor that so they just don't and
some of the most beautiful because how
would one measure that ATP is very
tricky to measure ATP production no ATP
can be measured the problem the problem
is is that what's the origin of it the
well that's what I mean isolating so
let's say you have a tumor cell in a non
tumor cell and they're both taking up
lots of oxygen as measured by you know
calorimetry and one's producing a bunch
of lactate but how can you tell if the
cancer cell is taking up oxygen and not
making ATP well if it's taking up oxygen
well it if it doesn't make ATP it's dead
alright so sorry if it's if it's not
making ATP commensurate with its oxygen
consumption
well sometimes you look at that and
you'd say well look at the oxygen
consumption is the the ATP production is
commensurate with oxygen uptake yes okay
that would be coupled wouldn't it as
long as it's not producing lactic acid
or sucks in a gas okay so either I'm a
bit confused why couldn't it do both
couldn't a cell undergo anaerobic
metabolism make ATP that is accounted
for by the amount of lactate that's
produced but similarly take up oxygen
and in a couple - and make ATP there
that's an important point because a lot
of people stumble on that the problem
with that is that when you're looking at
the ATP production coming out of the
mitochondria it's not always easy to
know whether it's from a coupled
generated by a coupled mechanism where
where the oxygen is in fact linked to
the ATP through f1 f0 ATPase or whether
it's coming from mitochondria
substrate-level phosphorylation there's
no it's not easy to do the mass balance
of this many moles of oxygen were
produced or consumed and this many moles
of ATP were produced you can tell you
that math yeah well Warburg did that but
he was looking he didn't know about SLP
right he well lactic acid production the
production of ATP the pyruvate kinase is
substrate level phosphorylation
but it's cytoplasmic yes yes it's not
monitor sorry oh he did not know he
couldn't have known because the very
systems that were the they didn't come
out until the fifties sixties that we
knew that there was another form of ATP
production inside the mitochondria what
people what people have failed to
realize is that the they consider if
every every biochemical textbook says we
only get two percent oxygen coming out
of the mitochondria through a substrate
level phosphorylation just like we get
from the cytoplasm but for cancer cells
people say oh you can get a lot more ATP
from the cytoplasm but not thinking you
can up regulate the same phenomenon
inside the mitochondria as a matter of
fact we think that substrate level
phosphorylation in the mitochondria is
far greater than the amount of ATP
produced in the cytoplasm and that's
because others can't Lee and others a
number of people have found that the PKM
to isoform of pyruvate kinase doesn't
make much ATP makes a buttload of lactic
acid but it's not making it's not linked
to the ATP production so therefore they
have to say no respiration is normal
because the cell is making so much ATP
but if I don't Warburg is correct and
and all the but all of the structural
biochemistry is correct the mitochondria
can't be making oxygen from oxidative
fog they can't be making ATP from Hux
vos it can't be because the structure of
the organelle is defective so where the
hell is all that damn ATP coming from
inside that organelle and then when you
look at the data that we have it's and
glutamine is being consumed in massive
amounts so it's got to be coming from
substrate level phosphorylation the
mitochondria which is interesting I'd
never thought until this discussion
about the possibility that you could
have a completely normal mitochondrial
genome and just have structural defects
and then of course
so you can have genetic abnormalities
that lead to protein productions they
create social problems but in the case
of the former perfectly normal genome
samandriel DNA genome my mitochondria
yeah but you now have a defective totem
what is the actual physical defect in
the in the structure yeah number
structure this is the it can happen in
many different ways for example if a
carcinogen enters into the mitochondria
they cause a lot of oxidative stress and
what we found in our massive studies
this is how we got onto onto the my
tokheim knowing that Otto Warburg was in
fact correct I mean at first I was
didn't know what the hell was going on
like any but like everybody else but
when we found no mutations in the
mitochondrial DNA and we knew these
cells were fermenting because they were
making a lot of lactic acid then we
started looking at the lipids inside the
the mitochondrial lipid dome like we
call it the lipid oum and we have found
that cardiolipin the signature lipid and
the inner membrane is defective in all
the tumor cells that we've ever looked
at so that tells us right there that
there's a problem in the function and
then weak link that to abnormalities in
ox fossa
so clearly lipids are abnormal that
would affect the the function of the
proteins of the electron transport chain
therefore you're not going to generate
the amount of ATP through oxidative
phosphorylation because the very lipid
and protein structures are abnormal and
you can't produce the amount of AC so
that's supports Warburg knew that there
was a there were many problems than the
mitochondrial function that would then
force the cell into fermentation so what
did they ferment they ferment lactic
acid and suck cynic acid what are the
fuels for that
it's glucose and glutamine so glucose
and glutamine are ultimately the fuels
that drive the cancer and they drive it
through process of substrate level
phosphorylation occurring in the
cytoplasm where they can build a lot of
metabolites for growth and also through
the pathway called glutamine alysus now
one can't render glucose zero meaning
there's no dietary or pharmacologic
intervention that could reduce glucose
levels to zero are there any that could
do that with glutamine let me just let
me address the glue
Koza shoe we can't get to zero but we
can get damn close to it
alright so we have people published
papers people who are going powerful
therapeutic fasting only and then given
large injections of insulin sure and
they've get to below 1 millimolar yeah
point 5 so but but sustainably it's very
difficult to be below about 3 millimolar
right right right but but here's the
situation the problem is is when you do
that you're going to calorie restriction
restrictive ketogenic diets you already
are lowering the blood sugar to a
significant degree and what we found is
that glucose transporters actually get
up regulated in the normal cells when
you start doing this so the normal cells
become glucose hungry and they become
direct competitors now with the tumor
cell that absolutely needs the glucose
because the normal cells can burn the
ketones and stay alive the tumor cells
can't burn the ketones because their
mitochondria defective so you need a
good mitochondrial system to burn
ketones for energy so what we do by
calorie restriction and keep restricted
ketogenic diets is we make the normal
cells glucose hungry and we transition
them over to ketones keep them alive but
they're still glucose hungry and they
are now competing directly with the
tumor cells that absolutely have to have
the glucose it's interesting because
clinically we don't see that right so
clinically when we put most people on a
ketogenic diet or a calorie restricted
diet in the short run they actually
become physiologically quite insulin
resistant meaning when you challenge
them with glucose they have a
paradoxical rise in glucose and insulin
that's overcome by refeeding them with
carbohydrates for 3 or 4 days prior to
the glucose challenge and the offered
explanation is that during a period of
starvation and/or carbohydrate
restriction the muscles which are the
obviously the dominant sink for glucose
basically become resistant to insulin
not in a pathologic way but rather in a
way to allow the brain to have access
for the remaining glucose well if you do
it in acute systems like that rather
than the chronic changes that we're that
we talked about you can get those kinds
of get those kinds of in effect
generally calorie restriction makes the
body super insulin sensitive yeah it's
interesting I this is something I've
struggled with because you know I was on
a ketogenic diet for three years
and at the end of that period of time I
went up to Stanford and did a an insulin
suppression test which is along with the
you glycemic clamp really the gold
standard for measuring measuring insulin
sensitivity would Gerald reven the late
Joey even and Jerry was just interested
in my physiology it was like wow you're
kind of a weird guy you you're on this
bizarre ketogenic diet hadn't studied it
he did at the time have a publication of
about 400 non-diabetic subjects who hae
had put through the insulin suppression
test the way this test works for the
listener is you take an individual you
hook them up to two intravenous lines
one that puts glucose in one that puts
insulin in and over a six-hour period of
time you follow a protocol of injecting
glucose and insulin and after about six
hours the glucose level reaches a steady
state level referred to as the SSP or
steady state plasma glucose level and
the higher that is the more insulin
resistant you are said to be the worse
you are at glucose disposal the lower
that is the more efficient you are able
to dispose of glucose oh and that number
the SSP G correlates to the one over the
M value which is the y-axis intercept on
the you glycemic clamp so anyway so I
went to Stanford one day but let me let
me add why would you inject glucose and
insulin if you were on a ketogenic diet
it'd be already and you were to take
glucose your insulin levels would
already go up to the maximum physiologic
so you're actually giving too much
insulin in a situation like well so this
was part of the issue right we didn't
know what to do because the protocol is
all developed around people not on a
ketogenic diet these are all be able
eating a standard diet but what you've
what you're alluding to is what we
discovered very quickly so again this is
supposed to be a six hour test yeah and
when you looked at and I looked at the
data before we did this to get a sense
of what the parameters were of the 400
non diabetics that they had done this on
the most insulin sensitive person ended
up having an SSP G of about 79
milligrams per deciliter meaning the
lowest that anyone's glucose got
following this protocol was 79
milligrams per deciliter which perfectly
reasonable and the
highest was I don't recall this but we
could look up the paper but I think it
was somewhere in the vicinity of 200 300
milligrams per deciliter so that's a
person who is functionally a diabetic
and even though they're quote-unquote
you know normal their a1c was less than
6.5 they're very soon to be a diabetic
and of course when you do this on people
with type 2 diabetes they're all very
very high so we're doing this test where
they're sampling glucose levels every 30
minutes and within an hour meaning after
just the first second third sample it
was clear my glucose was going down very
quickly so they said okay we're gonna
back off on the insulin to your point at
90 minutes and I have to go back and
look because I have all the data I could
be wrong maybe it was a little longer
than I think was about 90 minutes they
basically turned the insulin off now at
this point my ketone started to go down
I think between the 90 minute and the
two-hour mark it got really bad really
quick and my ketones at this point had
gone from I don't remember somewhere
between two and a half maybe three
millimolar down to less than 1
millimolar and they said you know we're
gonna stop the test now because your
your glucose is in the forties I believe
I was at about 48
yeah no ketones you're gonna go
unconscious you gotta be careful yeah so
in the end I almost did go unconscious
and the last thing I sort of remember
was the profound perspiration that came
over me which is very different from the
perspiration you experience like on a
day like today in Boston where it's hot
and you're sweaty it's it's not that
type of a perspiration at all it felt
like I was in a shower and I began
shaking and probably was about to have a
seizure and then they went so the last
blood glucose I think they I they got on
me was about 31 milligrams per deciliter
and when they were injecting the
dextrose the d50 I was conscious enough
to realize the IV had infiltrated so all
I felt was the most ridiculous burning
sensation in my antecubital fossa
because I realized the dextrose was not
getting and while you put yourself in
situations we're never doing it
when I came back to life I had a huge
huge infiltrated IV in my right my left
and a cube I took a picture of it and I
sent it to my wife and who I didn't even
tell that I had flown up to San
Francisco that day I think I was just
like you know I travel so much that like
I could be gone for days she wouldn't
even know it and I was like hey check
this out and she's like where are you
and I was like I'm up at Stanford today
doing such-and-such she's like what you
just about died and like you got it you
got it if you're gonna die I mean you're
an idiot but you've got to tell me in
advance where you're gonna be when you
die yeah well that mean our goal is is
not to try to kill ourselves is to kill
the tumor cells okay so my long-winded
story there was to illustrate a point I
turn out to be an exception to that rule
so and I did this with oral glucose
tolerance tests as well and I never had
that physiologic insulin resistance in
other words I seem to be one of the
people for whom what you're saying seems
to be correct chronically which is
whenever I'm on a ketogenic diet my
glucose disposal is remarkable but now
putting on your insulin set you're very
high insulin my muscles become very
insulin sensitive but without the
refeeding of carb yeah yes what I
noticed though is clinically I see so
many patients for whom that is not the
case if I do an OG TT and oral glucose
tolerance test on a patient in a
ketogenic diet I feel like and again I
think other physicians listening to this
will have to weigh in with their
opinions
I feel like 70% of them failed the OGT
T's and look like they have diabetes or
are very soon too however if when on the
repeat OGT t you just say look for the
three days prior to the test
you're gonna eat two potatoes a day they
pass with flying colors in other words
that they show that they are indeed very
insulin sensitive but they need to be
primed a little bit so my point though
is if that's the case if the 70% of
patients or whatever the number is they
wouldn't actually benefit from this
effect right because they'd be walking
around and not you know they'd be the
muscles would be selectively not
consuming that glucose unless you can
get the blood sugar down like as I said
where we're experimenting now cuz don't
forget our goal is to starve the tumor
cells this
I mean we're singularly focused on this
the issue here is how you starve the
fermentable fuels without causing
without starving the normal cell
yeah and harming at all it sounds
to me like you were brutalized that's
not to be done it that's not what our
goal is here our goal is to emerge from
the therapy healthier than when you
start it so the question becomes how low
can you get blood sugar without
compromising the health status of the
individual and again if the if you're in
ketosis you can push your blood Sugar's
down really low but you'd want to do
this without insulin because insulin
itself is Pro tumorigenic only if the
blood sugars are high enough once you
get those blood sugars down and you take
away all the glucose from the body or
the majority of it it kills the tumor
cells we have the data to support that
insulin per se is killing the tumor self
insulin production of glucose a
reduction of glucose even so you're
saying basically because you can't eat
insulin thank you so but but you're
saying insulin does not function as a
growth signal it outside of its anabolic
activity and taking up glucose well if
you have height like insulin-like growth
factor of course is linked to the
insulin of course that that facilitates
the uptake of glucose I mean if you
don't have glucose you don't have
glucose but that's a negative look at
what else is going on because without
ATP you can't get energy anyway so the
goal is to take deplete the sources of
fuel to the cells so insulin you can't
eat insulin now insulin drives the
pyruvate dehydrogenase complex which
facilitates that's why they say oh you
know you can get this and that that's
only if you have a lot of glucose around
insulin becomes prone to more genic but
if you have very little glucose and you
give more insulin remove the way it
doesn't stimulate tumor growth we have
direct evidence to support that so in
fact the Germans used to do that they
used to put people into insulin comas
the problem is you don't want anybody go
into an insulin coma if they were in
ketosis you could give it a shitload of
in splint and they're not gonna die
we've already have we have evidence in
the literature to support that so you
got to keep the door shut on that
insulin is on the glucose as shot as
tight as you can without harming the
rest of the body so we use insulin and
then we do hyperbaric chambers but that
comes only after you shut the door on
the insulin the glutamine so if you how
do you shut the door--and glutamine the
glutamine door you have to use dry
and the best drug we found so far is
dawn six days between or leucine it's an
old drug was made years ago they used to
use it on cancer patients but they they
never targeted glucose at the same time
so the tumor cells were sucking down the
glucose as a matter of fact you can even
make the gluten in more glucose
sensitive if you take away the glue so
there's no dietary strategy that could
effectively reduce now glutamine is is a
non-essential amino acid we make it from
we can make glutamine from glucose I
mean so it's why it's called
non-essential however in Physiology
terms it is essential it's the plays a
massive role and the gut in the immune
system and the urea cycle I mean it's
such an important amino acid that's
liquid it's the most abundant amino acid
in our body yeah that's a funny
distinction you I'm glad you pointed
that out for this is a total aside but
when I'm sure that there are people
listening to this we get confused by the
term essential and non-essential because
it's eight of them are essential in 12
are not essential or something to that
effect but what you're pointing out is
an important distinction they're
non-essential because we don't have to
get them exogenously they're still
essential for our survival once once
produced endogenous yes absolutely and
glutamine if you look it's the most
abundant amino acid in our serum it's
everywhere and our immune system just at
the end of the point being there's
nothing you're gonna eat or not eat
that's gonna change people ask me that
all the time
it's got to be drugged you got to do it
drugged and you have to use drugs but
but it has to be done strategically and
you have to have people that are
knowledgeable about this you can't just
have some guy just jack you up with a
drug that blocks glutamine because it
has to because your immune systems will
be compromised and our immune system is
needed for our the health of our gut the
health of killing bacteria and if you
use if you paralyze them too much then
you're going to get infections you're
going to have all kinds of other issues
so that's why we develop the press pulse
concept so you press the glucose hard
with diets and drugs and then you pulse
the glutamine so what we think is going
to happen is we will target the
glutamine with a drug that will
selectively kill tumor cells paralyze
the immune system but then immediately
give large amounts of glutamine back and
the issue of course is that you're going
to restore your gut you're going to
restore your immune system because
they're only paralyzed they're not
killed and when you say immune system
are you referring to the cellular or
humoral so
cellular mostly as you've implicated
we're going to come back to it but
you've kind of implicated the humoral
system with the macrophage in terms of
mutagenesis well that when you if we're
talking about the cellular immune yes
you're talking about the T cells and B
cells and macrophages and natural killer
cells leukocytes all these kinds of
things they're all glutamine dependent
they're all heavily glutamine dependent
okay so if you have a patient that's
burned the skin now you open up the
bacteria you have to give large amounts
of glutamine because you're the immune
system is needed to kill the bacteria
you have to restore the gut function a
lot of the cells in the gut or glutamine
dependent so that's why you know you
give a large amounts of glutamine to
cancer patients that have been that have
been subjected but the problem is of
course is the tumor cells are using the
same fuel so you have to be you have to
know and as I said if you kill too many
of the tumor cells too quickly
you've got to have a cell system to
remove the corpses you got to have some
asset and that's what the macrophages do
and some of these other immune cells
they'll come in and remove the corpses
the dead cells other why should get
infections you die from the indirect
effects of these things so you have to
know how to strategically target
glutamine without compromising the
normal physiological systems that we
have so before we get into the
therapeutic stuff which I understand
it's probably what everybody wants to
hear about I still want to get back to
kind of understanding some of the stuff
a little bit better so experimentally
I'm still struggling with this sort of
chasm in belief systems between what
sounds like the majority of people who
take the view that says look the
respiratory system of the cancer cell is
relatively normal if you're seeing an
increase in fermentation it's an
artifact of a higher throughput of
substrate to generate more building
blocks this strikes me as a very
testable hypothesis this really
shouldn't be we shouldn't be debating
this there should be a set of
experiments that could resolve that well
yeah and I think that diagram there on
the board is the illustration of the
strategy to test that hypothesis
basically which is where are they
getting their energy from the bottom
line is where are they getting their
energy from if you stop their energy the
board picture by the way we're looking
at everything we're looking at the I
will put a picture of this of course up
there but it's basically the TCA along
with everything outside of the TCA is
it's effectively looking like it's even
metabolic pathways that I can't name at
this moment yeah it's because you have
to try to integrate like you said you
have to try to integrate all of the
knowledge that we have on the
biochemical systems into a strategy to
manage the disease and I break it down
into some more simplistic things in
other words energy without energy
nothing grows and the evidence that I'm
convinced about but I've read massive
amounts of literature and looked
carefully at everything the structure
and function of the mitochondria and
tumor cells is compromised alright
that's a fact that's in my mind that is
a solid fact and to deny that one would
have to ignore the evidence that I've
looked at you have to look at a
mitochondria and say no that
mitochondria that has no cristae and is
very few in number there's nothing wrong
with it
okay let's call it white black and black
white I mean but let's go one step
further because there's an objective way
to assess structure but shouldn't we
just ask the functional question well
mentally I'm yeah of course and we do
and we do that so we know structure
dictates function we with that's a
common in biology then if that structure
looks abnormal at the electron
microscopy level at the various levels
why don't we look now at the activity of
the met proteins in the electron
transport chain and just as an this may
be a naive question but there can be
large ranges of structure that could
still produce optimal function and you
would think that for something as
important as respiration which to your
point might be the single most important
function of a cell as evidenced by the
fact that toxins like cyanide are
uniformly fatal within seconds you'd
think that the structural leeway within
a mitochondria would be so high that you
could let's just say you could quantify
structure as you know a scale from one
to ten and obviously a 10 out of 10
structure is perfectly functional you'd
want to believe that that thing would
function good enough down to like a 2
out of 10 and only if you were
staggeringly compromised does everything
go to hell so in other words just to
push back for a moment one could argue
hey yeah of course there's structural
changes but they're there
not functionally relevant because
they're within a parameter space yeah no
that's important point and I think the
normal flexibility of ourselves yeah
that's the better word flexibility yeah
the normal flexibility is able to
accommodate those kinds of changes over
the short period of time mitochondria is
such an incredibly vibrant system it's
it's a living organ L inside of
ourselves right it's a it's a it's a
separate organism actually separate DNA
yeah and they've turned over all of
their DNA to the nucleus
except for 13 critical genes and those
13 critical genes controlled the front
the life of the cell it's so it why
shouldn't I do this activity when I can
get a dumb ass nucleus to do it for me
but I'm still gonna hold the keys to the
kingdom there's still 13 genes that if
anything goes wrong with them you're
dead and this is the whole thing why
cancer cells don't die through the a
pathetic mechanism because the very
organelle that controls the kill switch
his day doesn't the switch doesn't work
so the cell bypasses the normal control
of life a pitocin
in the cell because the very organelle
that dictates that is now defective so
consequently this cell now is reverting
back to the way it existed before oxygen
came into the atmosphere on the planet
they were all fermenters they grew on
with unbridled proliferation until the
fermentable fuel in the environment
disappeared and they all died so it was
very clear what was going on before
oxygen came on to the into the
atmosphere cells would proliferate
on brothers descent gorga Albert Shanker
gave his alpha period and the existence
of the planet so everything was working
on substrate level phosphorylation it
wasn't no oxidative phosphorylation they
were all doing that what we have in our
system today is these same capabilities
but we don't use them but only for very
short periods of time under very various
physical physiological stress stress
situations they're not a part they don't
become permanent in the cancer cell they
have become adapted because of Warburg
said you can't get a cancer cell from a
cell that cannot ferment so neurons in
the brain can't ferment for very long
you never rarely if ever get a tumor out
of a neuron except neuroblastoma which
is outside the brain so heart cardiac
myocytes rarely form cancers even muscle
cells rarely form because you lose
sheets and stuff so cells that need a
of oxidative phosphorylation rarely can
form a tumor only tumors can form in
those cells that can up regulate
fermentation pathways if you can't do
that you're gonna die but wait wouldn't
skeletal muscle be one of the highest
candidates to be able to up regulate
fermentation given their ATP demand yes
but they have a syncytium of
mitochondria inside the muscles and
they've adapted this is their part of
the normal physiology they can ferment
for periods of time under extreme
stressful conditions they can't
permanently do that they die the muscles
will die on you the cells will die if
you try to force them into a ferment a
long-term fermentation metabolism but
they have the capacity to operate
fermentation for short periods of time
like many cells do but brain can't do
that heart can you let's go back to the
this is an interesting point you bring
up let's go back to a Maya site within
my quadricep yeah versus a epithelial
cell in my colon yeah to your point the
probability I will get a cancer that
arrived that comes from the Maya site in
my quadricep tis virtually zero oh and
say virtually zero but I mean outside of
a sarcoma sarcomas well you know what is
this arc what's the origin of the
sarcoma what kind of stands it can be mi
elias are coming there might be many but
but just humor me for a moment the
probability-wise
the Maya site in my quadricep or my pecs
or something forming cancer is so much
lower than the epithelial cell in my
colon right yeah or an epithelial cell
in your kidney yes one of these guys I
just picked : because I start a high
cancer Robert your breast is another
yeah yeah right so what is it they
explained to me again the difference in
their because because I would say like
the muscle cell is far more adaptable at
making lactate when it needs to because
it's I demand of it much more than I
demand of my colonic epithelial cell but
then say what you were saying again
about the toxicity of lactate to that
cell versus the epithelial cell and my
colon well the epithelial cell in your
colon if it becomes and again it's a
longer process you know it's not
something you don't go from a normal
cell to a cancer cell overnight in a
colon there are some situations where
cancer can happen much quicker than
people would normally think but in
general it's like it's a protracted
process so at the
CEL has to have the capacity to shift
from an oxidative process to a
fermentation process you have to have
the machinery in the cell to be a
fermenter because without the cap of
that capacity you can never become a
tumour cell because the cancer is
two-fold process one is the gradual
chronic interruption in respiratory
function coupled with a gradual
compensatory shift to the alternative
form of energy which is substrate level
phosphorylation so if the cell is
incapable of making that shift it will
never become a cancer cell it can't
because you in order to be a cancer cell
you have to be able to replace ox foss
with fermentation and if you can't do
that
you're not going to become a cancer cell
and that's why brain neurons rarely
become tumour cells because they can't
do that brain cells die so if you
interrupt oxidative phosphorylation and
then in the neurons of our brain we call
that neuro degeneration so we don't
generally get tumors we get tumors from
the glial cells and the microglia on
these kinds of things because yeah this
is important I mean I know what you're
saying but I know the listener will be
confused by this because they're gonna
say but gosh my aunt had brain cancer
yeah it's very important that we
distinguish between the glial cells and
the neurons right the microglia there's
another form of yeah which we think are
even last year about astrocytomas which
would be the most common brain tumors
they're not actually the cancers is not
existing in the neuron that's correct
yeah they're not neuro so these are the
kinds and/or cardiomyocytes
yeah jelly cuz you're gonna you know
they just they die they these cuz you'll
packed with mitochondria you start they
start fermenting you can't they die they
can't deal with that again see that's
the part time that just confuses me it's
so counterintuitive I would think that
if there's gonna be a cell in my body
that I want to be able to buffer lactate
and specifically buffer the hydrogen ion
that comes with it that's actually
what's killing this so I would want my
cardiac myocyte to be the single most
robust cell in the body because it has
to be the last guy standing yeah well
you know this is the whole thing when
you get a cut when you get a heart
attack you die from brain damage you
don't die from your liver and kidneys
are fine that's why you can donate your
liver
he's waiting heart attack because those
cells are not dying because they have
that they of a brain is most susceptible
to the
epoxy but the point is even at the level
of the highest stress I would want my
cardiac myocytes to be able to access
all fuels glucose fatty acid ketone well
they came they do that with heart rate
of heart disease but they don't form
cancer they have a capacity and this is
where we found a lot of substrate level
phosphorylation in the mitochondria the
TCA cycle was discovered in stressed
hearts okay so because they were saying
we're with that the heart should be dead
right I mean why is it still functioning
here where's the ATP coming from and
they found that the way most of them
energy in the heart is coming from
mitochondrial substrate levels for
shorter periods of time I'm not saying
this is AB you can't do this as a
permanent shift but the concepts were
developed from the word the work in the
heart but you would expect yeah well
same with my brain
I mean why that be I mean if your brain
damaged you can't function either I mean
so the two organs heart and brain are
remarkably dependent on oxidative
phosphorylation for function and
disruptions of oxidative phosphorylation
are usually catastrophic for those cells
I mean of course after time I I think I
understand your argument what you're I
was thinking about it in Reverse you're
saying because the brain and the cardiac
myocyte have evolved to be so efficient
under oxidative conditions it's not so
much that lactate is harmful to them
it's that once you start to disrupt if
the hypothesis is correct that it's the
disruption in the mitochondria and its
capacity to carry out ox foss that's
harmful you died long before you get
bother getting cancer those cells get
undergo apoptosis or just die I
understand your yes yes that's the point
that's the point so so the key is that
how long does it take to transition to
cell from an oxidative phosphorylation
state in a cell that can be coming to
them or like a colon as you mention so
the real problem that these other cells
have where cancer is so ubiquitous
whether it be breast or colon according
to this hypothesis would be their
metabolic flexibility it's their
capacity to easily wax and wane between
I shouldn't say it's not their
flexibility it's their lack of
dependency on oxidative phosphorylation
well they dependent I mean obviously
like you said with cyanide I mean it's
not everything's dead real quick if that
happens so cool
quickly that they don't have the ebb and
flow is their capacity to upregulate
fermentation over time because it
doesn't happen overnight it's a very
gradual thing and hearten heart
cardiomyocytes and neurons of the brain
can't do that that these other cells are
capable of doing and as I said what
happens is the again you had that retro
Singh the mitochondrial stress response
and this is where your oncogenes come in
now because the oncogenes are
transcription factors that up regulate
fermentation pathways so basically you
when you damage the respiratory system
of a cell if one alpha becomes
stabilized and now you can up regulate
glucose transporters into the cell
glutamic is a glutamine they're all
overlap each other
lactic acid dehydrogenase you know all
these enzymes that are geared for
maintaining a fermentation metabolism
the transcription factors that make
those pathways up regulated are the
oncogenes basically so the oncogenes
have to facilitate if you're if you're
not going to get the same level of
energy out of your ox vas you've got to
compensate to get because as I tell
everybody the singular most largest
consumer of energy in any cell is the
pumps these pumps that are on the
surface of the cells that maintain the
ionic gradients that allow what we call
life with it because once you reach
equilibrium you're dead so most of the
energy in any cell cancer cell heart
cell and it's this it's the proton
motive gradient across the membrane that
determines whether or not that cells
gonna be alive or not so you need any
ATP for that if the ATP dissipates just
swell and die you get anything to go
wait to play pop ptosis or whatever so
you have to then determine you know
where am I where's my ATP coming for how
am I going to keep those pumps going so
and if fermentation becomes a
replacement therefore I'm going to need
a lot of extra fermentable fuels to make
up the loss of the energy that I'm
getting out of out of ox phos so anger
genes have to turn on because they are
the transcription factors that up
regulate the transporters for glucose
and glutamine so so you're bringing in
two alternative fuels to make up the
difference and therefore the genetic
behavior of the cell
begins to change and then because the
cell is now using damaged respiration
you throw out a lot of reactive oxygen
species from the damaged respiratory
system and they caused their mutagenic
and carcinogenic so the the nuclear
genome gradually collects all these
different mutations and defects coming
from the Ross of the mitochondria but at
the same time the cell is not dying from
this rust because it's being protected
by the fermentation pathways of glucose
and glutamine how much of that lactate
is leaving the cell and going back to
the liver to go the Cori cycle yes a lot
of it a lot of it does has anyone ever
looked at patients who have a very very
high tumor burden and seeing if they
appreciably have higher serum lactate
levels yes then blood cancers have been
from some of them in fact some there
have been some patients who have had
various leukemias where they died
electic acidosis from so much lactic
acid being produced from the tumor cells
there's a couple of papers reported on
that lactic acidosis from massive
leukemias okay so the leukemia the same
thing it's a blood cell there
mitochondria defective so they're
throwing out a lot of light although
that's a confusing one because I could
come up with another explanation which
is in very very severe leukemias you
could also create multiple end organ
ischemia just due to the defective
nature of the wipes all right white
white blood cells could actually cause
capillary damage and you that that
lactic acidosis could actually be from
other organs that's true and the paper
that I read seemed to focus on the
lactic acidosis from the cancer cells
themselves but it doesn't rule out that
what you just said yeah and we I don't
know how you'd quantify the decision oh
it's another one of these things but the
question is you know but you're right
you can't make like a solid tumor seeing
a lot of lactic acid in the bloodstream
it's the core recycle clears it out
pretty quick so you're gonna be taking
that lactic acid and making glucose
again from it which thank you tumor
cells up regulate the machinery I
believe MC t2 is the lactate transporter
do they up regulate that specifically
yeah that's I mean it's it's up
regulated and so is lactic acid LDH a
lactic acid dehydrogenase a which
converts pyruvate to lactate acid oh
yeah rather than B so most cancer cells
do not have elevated levels this is why
some people say all cancer cell
can burn lactic acid oh where where they
burning it oh well because you know
they're taking it back in the cancer
cells are burn notes
if it can't put poop pyruvate into the
mitochondrion pump and lactic acid how
is it possible we take like this and
make it back the Peruvian put it in it
if it does that and it's gonna go up to
you're gonna store it as glycogen glycol
you're gonna it's not gonna be respired
it do you know if anybody looked at that
and seen if MCT - I think it's MC - yeah
there's the disorder there was sure you
have regular odd yeah they're up
regulated there's no question they're up
because otherwise the hydrogen ion would
poison this cell yeah so you have the
whole thing is upregulated mono
carboxylic acid transporters they dump
out and they also take in ketones don't
forget the same that same transporter
brings in ketones so when you go into
ketogenic diets the MCTS are upregulated
as well so that you're bringing in more
tea and more ketone bodies now to
replace there's an irony for you right
there the st. the thing that you use to
bring in ketones is cos is giving you
the exit for a lactate which protects
the cell from the harm of the acidosis
that comes with the hydrogen ion in the
micro environment of the tumor it's a
real it's a real mess so some of the
lactic acid is persisting the hydrogen
ions are persisting until they can lose
out into the local bloodstream and get
back to the liver that way but otherwise
it's going to be a real acidic mess
which then which then contributes
further to the fermentation behavior of
the cells which then their resistance so
they're fermenting right so they don't
need blood blood vessels so this is a
whole why the angio genic
anti-angiogenic field has failed because
they said what will target the blood
vessels and therefore the cells will die
because they can't get the oxygen and
whatever but the cancer cell doesn't
need that
I mean it doesn't need the blood vessels
it can ferment did you know to to folk
won by the way you guys were basically
neighbors yeah yeah I know he came down
here he gave a talk you know as some of
his he taught he targeted some unusual
kinds of cancers with his
anti-angiogenic but hooked up napoleon
Farrar I believe was the guy who started
taking that all off and he even came to
a meeting he said none of this stuff is
working well because the 10th that and
this is why I've Astin as I wrote you
know avoid it like the plague
it's a stupid drug it was taken off the
market for breast cancer because it was
harming more people than it was helping
but they still use it for brain cancer
and I think it makes still use it do
they still use it for colon
answer as well I don't know of colon
cancer but for certainly for brain
cancer so what are you doing you're
targeting the blood vessels and then
forcing these cells to spread throughout
your whole brain so just for the
listener right they've asked in is an
anti-angiogenic yeah this was a
Genentech blockbuster but Bevis is
Amanda the name of the drink yeah and
they still use it I think it's
despicable to consider anybody using I
mean don't they know the biology of the
problem they would never do that and
it's already been a bust and all the
brain cancer studies that I've seen in
fact my friends have told me that work
on this that's but it makes the it's
generally been priced out of use
certainly outside of the US I don't
think any third party payors would cover
it and it's a very expensive drug it's
about $100,000 a year and all it does is
contribute to the invasive behavior of
his tumor cells and all of these other
things you're basically driving this
idea which I haven't wrapped my head
around yet is you're actually enhancing
the promotion of the hypoxic factors
that are giving cancer some of its
selective benefit yeah and it's force
and don't forget the cells that are
invading which are coming from disrupted
microglia in the brain macrophages they
will invade they're already have the
capacity to do this they live without
blood vessels so so you're facilitating
the invasive behavior this has been seen
on his on histological preparations like
brains that have been looked at after
Avastin they find tumor cells spread
through everywhere in the brain rather
than clustered in one area it's like you
know it's like they've just gone
everywhere so and but when you look at
the EM art when you look at the image
the radiographic images it looks good
because you don't see that that the
living in the Quranic area that you
would normally say well it looks it
looks like it's like the image looks a
little bit better you tell the patient
looks like it's working but the overall
survival is no different sometimes it's
even less so it's a false image of
what's going on you can't see the big
central area it looks like it's very
vague and and and diffuse and you look
the pale yeah it looks like this thing
is working gives the guy false hope you
know because the end result is look at
the overall survival statistics in there
and they're abysmal so I want to go back
to something you said a moment ago you
said macrophage which reminded me of a
point you brought up earlier which I
guess I'm just not really familiar with
which was the idea that the macrophage
themself may be responsible for actual
metastatic behavior yes can you say a
bit more about that well this is a
concept that
goes all the way back to Akhil from 1906
in Germany where he was I able to show
that in coal I believe was calling her
melanoma can't remember the tissue he
was actually observing fusion behavior
between the neoplastic cells and the
cells of her immune system and then
claim that he thinks after this fusion
at fusion event that these cells become
much more aggressive and much more
dispersive than than before these fusion
events this was then solidified by the
work of John Pollock at Yale University
where he did some beautiful experiments
showing that malignant melanoma is
actually a macrophage disease there the
resulting of fusion hybridization this
was then further established by Melissa
Wong her group at the Portland Medical
Center there the health Health Science
Center in Portland Oregon
beautiful work showing showing how in
the colon how macrophages were fueling
with the fusing with neoplastic stem
cells forming these hybrid cells so the
question and we know that all these
metastatic cancers are highly
fermentative all right we know that's a
fact they're all they're all highly
fermentative so and they're all very
very invasive and they spread that they
migrate through the blood-brain bad they
migrate everywhere they just invade and
these are all behaviors of macrophages
when you say fusion so you have a
neoplastic cell that is above the
basement membrane and you have a
macrophage and tell me what the fusion
actually is are they fusing genetic
material or they just fusing cytoplasmic
material what's actually well it's
combination of both actually
so macrophages cells of our immune
system are extremely extremely few so
genic okay they do this doomed healing
like you'll see multinucleated giant
cells and a lot of parts of our bodies
during wound healing and this kind of
thing and cancer cells you also find a
lot of these multinucleated kinds of
cells so our body recognizes wounding as
an acute problem and the immune system
will come into that local area to
facilitate wound healing and when the
wound persists sometimes these cells
will fuse with each other
and fuse with other cells in the micro
environment to facilitate wound healing
the problem is is if you have an
epithelial cell like a breast cell or a
colon cell that is coming and becoming
neoplastic
becoming dysmorphic and its growth
regulatory and it's fermenting but it
doesn't have the capacity to grow
anywhere outside of that local area it
doesn't have have the capacity so our
immune cells come into this lesion if
you will that's persisting the immune
cell throws out growth factors and
cytokines to facilitate the wound to
facilitate wound healing the problem is
those factors are also facilitating the
growth of the neoplastic cell so the
neoplastic cell is dysregulated but the
very cell that's coming in to try to
correct the wound is now provoking the
cell to grow even more because but what
is the wound that the macrophage is
coming in to see because the neoplastic
cell has not yet violated the membrane
beneath no but it creates a it throws
out lactic acid and creates a kind of
hypoxic
micro area okay a micro area of high pot
because that lactic acid is a signal of
hypoxia it's a signal of some sort of
damage and you're not supposed to have
pockets of build-up lactic acid in parts
of your body so it sends OU and normally
at this if this does happen if we have a
contusion or a cut cells of our
monocytes mass migrate out of the
bloodstream go into the wound clear up
the debris kill the bacteria and then
move out of that out of that section go
back to local lymph nodes and sit there
in the event that you need it again or
if they pus they form pus they they're
all massive numbers of white dead blood
cells so these cells are part and parcel
of the correction of the wound the
problem is in that if you have a colon
lesion or a breast lesion from an
occluded milk duct or whatever or lesion
in the calling you have population of
cells that will start to proliferate
creating a damage to the local
microenvironment signaling a system this
there's something going on here right so
when the market when the monocyte gets
out and differentiates become the
macrophage goes to this now poorly
differentiated cell why doesn't it just
kill that cell nonspecifically because
this is just a macrophage and how does
that well macrophages aren't designed to
kill cells they're designed to kill
bacteria that may be in the micro
environment don't forget they're wound
healing cell but going back to the
bruise example right so you get a
contusion in your thigh the the
macrophage does play a role in clearing
that cellular debris yes so why doesn't
it just effectively do
same thing with the cancers or with the
soon-to-be cancer yeah because the cell
is not recognized as being its looks it
looks like it's a part of the local
normal epithelial cells okay it's just
it's not it's a it's not looking at as
if this is a foreign invader this cell
has all of that it looks like a regular
epithelial cell that's proliferating
because don't forget we replace
ourselves by proliferation but the
lactate secretion which is what got it
there in the first place wouldn't that
tell the macrophage hey something's
still wrong here yes
this cell is hardwired to do what it's
supposed to do it's not like thinking oh
let me let me problem-solve this is not
a problem-solving cell it's hardwired to
respond to a particular environmental
issue I see so you're saying the lactate
is the fight is the fire alarm that got
it there but then when it gets there it
doesn't see the fire no it well it tries
to put out the fire but the problem is
what the molecules that are used to put
out the fire actually stimulating the
growth of the cell that shouldn't be
grown so it's out of context okay so how
does this facilitate metastasis rather
than just local advancement right so so
at what point in this protracted process
does this now spring to become a
metastatic lesion over over a controlled
political T that's not yet breaking
through the basement membrane or we're
doing this right so we don't know
sometimes this can happen very fast
sometimes it takes a long period of time
because we have these certain cancer
cells called cancer of unknown primary
they're highly metastatic is where they
only came from all right that we don't
know what what's but they're very highly
invasive then we have other cells that
will well he had a lesion there a long
time for several years this thing never
healed it was always losing it was it
and eventually explodes into a
metastatic lesion we don't know at what
point and - varies from one person to
the next when now what happens is when
the Macra FET we know biology there whew
so genic cells there's massive amounts
of biology to show that macrophages are
very few so genic cells they confuse
with themselves or with other
fibroblasts they confuse with a variety
of different cells usually that's part
of the wound healing process to
facilitate wound healing but if you fuse
with a stem cell that has already
defective respiratory systems
you would then dilute the cytoplasm of
the cell that you fused it with and it
fuses again and again it's a process
that takes place you eventually dilute
the normal mitochondria in the
macrophage and you replace it with the
abnormal mitochondria from the cells
that you're fusing with then leading to
a cell with dysregulated growth growth
properties how much how much of the
mutation how many mutations would it
take to do that we don't know because
there's some metastatic cells that don't
have any mutations if you can believe it
deep sequencing they haven't found any
mutations in some of these cells so but
they're fermenting and they're spreading
they have their growth dysregulated so
but wait how are they growth
dysregulated without a mutation you have
cells that are carcinogenic that are
tumorigenic that have no mutations Baker
pointed this out it's like people can't
believe this on the other hand we have
skin cells loaded with so-called driver
mutations that never form a tumor
so this linkage between the number of
mutations and the type of cancer is just
there's so many flaws in this so there
are there are cancer cells that have
been looked at that have highly invasive
metastatic and they can't find the
mutations in there
that's not common but it happens so it
throws it it's it's a violation to the
whole concept in glioblastoma there are
some tumors that have been found that
have none of the driver mutations none
of them none of the abnormalities that
you would have expected that are found
in others so there's a break linkage
between mutate you don't need new
mutations to cause a metastatic lesion
that doesn't mean that a metastatic
lesion has no mutations but maybe I'm
asking a different question okay so two
women have breast cancer right and for
all intents and purposes they have very
similar patterns of mutations in their
breast cancer and let's just say make it
easy and say that their hormone ELISA
mold their their er PR positive her2 new
negative breast cancers both women
present as stage t to n1 right so
they've got whatever a five centimeter
tumor if that's a still a t2 I don't
even remember and they've got you know
two lymph nodes or one lymph node
they both have a resection 10 years
later one of them is still disease-free
the other one has died from brain
metastasis which were presumably seeded
before the primary tumor was resected
ten years earlier it's not a sloppy
surgery where they didn't get part of
the cancer what I'm hearing you say is
yeah one of them could undergo
metastasis while the other one did not
even though their primary tumors looked
very similar is that yea the correct
answer I think that's that's correct and
and what we find now with a number of
papers is the needle biopsies that you
are used to diet diagnose the tumors can
create a wounded even a more aggressive
wounded situation in the micro
environment of the tumor leading to the
phenomena of inflammatory uncle taxes
which facilitates the fusion and in
other words by looking at the tumor with
a needle biopsy to make the diagnosis
you put that patient potentially at risk
for causing a metastatic lesion and then
when you look at the profile you say
well this doesn't look too bad no not
not here but wait wait let's say we do
that we're gonna immediately resect that
tumor anyway so how is that how quickly
does this process take place because the
wound is between the outside world and
the tumor not between the tumor and the
inside world necessarily especially if
that tumor is going to come out you know
within a few weeks right yeah we know
from a number of studies that needle
biopsies can facilitate in some patients
the invasion of cells into the local and
spread all right we know this this has
been reported in the literature for
breast for Colin for liver for brain the
very act of stabbing this growth but ya
know I think what's get the cells out I
think what's known is that you can seed
tumors along the tract of where you do
that yes that I understand but maybe I
misunderstood you're saying that a woman
who has a needle biopsy of her breast
who then goes on to get a lumpectomy has
that increased her risk of brain
metastasis well it wouldn't be brain
metastases right away it would have to
that brain metastases the secondary
metastatic behavior and Tate has taken a
while there's it's not just the brain
how does
needle biopsy increased the risk of that
needle biopsy creates a more inflamed
condition that's why I call an
inflammatory Anka Texas and now this was
one of the reasons why they get rid of
the Moores elation procedure because
this is what was happening so these
women were dying from metastatic cancer
from oscillation it's kind of a machine
that used to be made by Johnson &
Johnson for uterine removing uterine
polyps well you've taken a polyp and
you're grinding it up and creating
inflammatory Anka taxes no there might
have been one polyp out of a thousand
that was that would have this right but
that's very different from the I'm
asking very specific question cuz here's
my fear what I don't want is anybody
listening to this who's got a breast
lesion who thinks now they can't have it
biopsied I'm still I think that's a very
different case than the example well the
evidence is clear in some cases not all
cases not everybody who goes under a
needle biopsy is gonna have metastatic
cancer number that's not the question I
mean what I'm asking is is a woman if
you take a thousand women you take it's
a thought experiment you take a million
women with an identical breast cancer
and you take half a million of them and
you just do the resection and the other
half a million you do a needle biopsy to
confirm the diagnosis then you do a
resection are you saying in the half a
million women that had a resection
following a biopsy their probability of
metastatic cancer later on is greater I
think so but I can't be sure because
that experiment hasn't done okay I'm
basing it on what has already been known
about needle biopsies facilitating the
spread of the tumor but I again I'm just
being critical of this because I I feel
very strongly about not causing panic in
people but I don't don't think those
data are about needle tracks eating yeah
well needle tracks don't for example
like as you said look you have a liver
biopsy you can you can get cancer cells
through the track even after but that's
very different from saying you know cuz
that that can be dealt with but this is
a very different yeah well I think this
is from what I'm looking at now I look
at it the brain predominantly right you
know how many we have what we call
secondary glial blastoma and that is
very it's not uncommon that when you go
in and remove a low-grade tumor that
within a shorter period of time it turns
into a
blastoma this is the same phenomenon
you're just doing it a little bit larger
scale rather than just through a needle
biopsy so you go in and you take out a
low-grade tail a tumor and all of a
sudden within a year or something you've
got glioblastoma sometimes even less and
you say what the hell happened here
so this is just a large what's the
control for that observation well there
meaning like another explanation would
be the person who has the stage one
astrocytoma is more at risk for the
stage 2 3 or 4 astrocytoma from the
operation itself from the provocation of
the microenvironment without it we'd
have to have a group of those patients
who don't undergo surgery that's right
and you would have to but who's doing
nobody's doing these experiments but we
but here's the situation what our
philosophy is that is if we shrink the
tumor whether it's a breast to him or
calling to him or whatever if we take
away the fermentable fuels and shrink
that tumor down then it becomes a
candidate for complete debulking not not
diagnosing okay when you take a needle
biopsy of a breast and you look at what
are they why are they doing that they're
doing if amazingly two reasons to try to
diagnose what level of cancer you have
and then to give you a gene read out
like this genes are gonna play some role
and whether or not you're gonna get a
treatment right well yeah for example in
the case of doing a biopsy before a
breast resection you there's value in
knowing if a woman might benefit from
neoadjuvant therapy for example based on
the receptor profile yeah but in other
words it might not just be the gene
right like knowing that she's er she's
triple positive or negative right right
might change what you do yeah I guess it
could but but the bottom line is is that
why don't you assume that you have a
problem why don't you just put that
patient on metabolic therapy and shrink
that tumor down and then do a
non-invasive check did it did the
Border's change at all from that from
the metabolic and then just the bulk it
completely the probability of cure is
going to be better in my mind then if
you do a needle biopsy without doing the
debulking and just to say let's look at
this how long after the needle biopsy do
you put that patient at risk for
possibly ceding a cell that gets
to a lymph node that then can spread out
and later that you get brain metastases
liver metastases or whatever else can
happen from these cancers so the
question is why put anybody at risk well
if we know we have evidence from the
literature to say that is a possibility
why would we want to put anyone at risk
for that unless the information you get
from the needle biopsy is going to be a
curative procedure and a lot of times
it's not okay it's just for diagnosis
procedures and now today we're using all
these gene screens $7,200 to tell
somebody what kind of gene profile and
that may no longer be relevant after
you've taken a needle biopsy from the
very tissue you're doing yeah I know I
think that makes sense I guess I'm a bit
confused by the idea I guess I just
don't see your controversial issues I
and I and I'm looking at it from the
point of the biological processes that
are taking place from these procedures
and knowing that I've seen literature on
lung I've seen liver cancer certainly
for brain I mean but but here's is so I
mean there are so many potential
arguments right so you look at one of
the most metastatic cancers of all time
is pancreatic cancer right it's it's
almost uniformly fatal and yet up until
recently very infrequently biopsied it's
a very difficult biopsy you do it with
an ERCP no that's true so yet in other
words you can still have a incredibly
aggressive metabolic cancers which have
never which are you know or not often
and then conversely you look at a GBM
you look at a you know the cancer we're
sitting here talking about the brink you
know a very aggressive one that john
mccain just passed away from well that's
I mean that's only locally metastatic it
never leaves the CNS does it oh yeah it
does
where does it go it goes to bone it goes
to liver it goes that nobody looks at
that what percentage of patients died
from or no not many but when they look
they supped they find this was one of
the big things this is how we discovered
the macrophage origin of the of the
cancer we started looking and saying how
many people do autopsies of organs on
people who've died from glioblastoma and
what did you find
there's a hundred articles in the
literature with metastatic GBM to
various organs for people dying people
say well it doesn't happen at all
you know why they died the GBM before
they start recognizing they have
metastatic liver cancer but when you
look at livers and kidneys and these
other organs from patients who have died
from GBM those studies that have looked
have found cancer so clearly these sales
are coming out of the brain and they're
getting into the other organs the
problem is the patients aren't living
long enough to have a problem what was
worrying about the guy's liver when his
brain is starting to swell up from from
all the treatments they're giving him I
mean 12 months most people are dead so
but there's over 100 articles in the
scientific liver literature showing
outside I call extracranial metastasis
of glioblastoma so it's not that it's
it's and people ignore it it's like
knowing that the mitochondria damaged in
in cancer cells people ignore it well I
guess that would be I'd be that'd be a
more forgivable thing to ignore because
I'm not convinced it necessarily changes
the story the mitochondrial one is a
much more interesting question right if
I mean that to me of all the things
we've talked about today Tom that's the
one that kind of has me scratching my
head the most and wondering in 2018 how
are we even having that this is it this
this should be something that's not
debated this should be sort of like this
would be like debating whether DNA is
necessary to make RNA like that that
that discussion was settled in the 50s
and anyone who disputes that now is sort
of you know disputing the shape of the
earth so I guess to me given the stakes
here I would love to figure out why
people aren't answering this question
well let's look at the situation from
even a greater distance in the United
States we have over 1600 people today
dying from cancer all right this is
horrific
right there's over a half a million
people a year 1,600 people with a dying
from cancer obviously there's something
seriously wrong there's something's
massively wrong with what we're doing
with this disease you know when we talk
about needle biopsies we're talking
about this we're talking about that the
issue is we had 1,600 people that they
dying why are all these people dying
from cancer so it's either we have a
fundamental misunderstanding of what the
nature of the diseases were mistreating
it we're treating it as something that
other than what it actually is so the
debate that you mentioned now is that
the results of the dead people are the
consequences of the fundamental
misunderstanding of the process of the
biology of the disease what I'm arguing
is that now understanding the biology of
the disease we have the potential to
drop the death rate by more than 50% in
ten years there's no question about it
if you stop doing half of the stuff that
we're doing to these cancer patients
looking at the biology and the nature of
the disease how to best go about this
strategically I think we can drop the
death rate by 50% we're doing stupid
things right with needle biopsy tumor
cells for Trojan etic profiling that has
no relevance to the nature of the
disease that's just one we just to go
back to that because I'm sorry it's just
I just I really want to make sure people
aren't gonna stop refusing their
biopsies but have we seen an increase in
the rate of metastases in the era of
needle biopsy for genetic sequencing I
mean we could go back and look at the
death rate from cancer 50 years ago
before anybody was doing this and it was
the same yeah well I think that we've
we've probably I don't want to say I
just want to say that every year we have
more and more dead people this is this
is and the increase is faster than the
general population okay so we had 3.8
percent increase in indefinitely is that
is that actually true is the age
adjusted population adjusted mortality
of cancer today higher than it was 50
years ago I think it's about three or
four percent lower so I just did the
last five years okay from 2013 to 2017
but to test this hypothesis we'd want to
take an even longer time period and go
you know more extreme as far as well you
know I mean every year it's good there's
no year that we have fewer they're
always coming the dead people are piling
up so you know when I look at the
numbers and I say okay what was the
percent of population increase in the
United States over the last five years
and according to the demographics it's
not 2.9 percent okay over the same
period
how many cancer does but again I'm again
not I don't know my epidemiology well
enough to make this case but I'm gonna
try anyway
isn't the growth in population more a
function of the input of people meaning
birth rate rather than the people who
are getting cancer which are the older
folks well we have younger people too
right right but the majority of cancer
older folks for sure so I'm not sure
that that population argument would well
I would answer that
questioner well maybe there's always a
guy you can find I think all you have to
look at is the numbers of people that
are dying from the disease I mean that's
a fact you know no it's a fact and it's
a tragic fact I guess you know a 50
percent reduction in this and the
mortality of this disease in ten years
is a very bold statement given that
we've seen about a three percent
reduction in cancer mortality in 50
years yeah which which I think you're
arguing is unacceptable and under well
you know yeah I'm looking at it from
from the tragedy in China is eight
thousand one hundred people today dying
from cancer I mean that's the number
over there maybe have I was the big
bigger population but the problem it's
now surpassed heart disease in their
country clearly it's not whatever we're
doing and yes 50 percent if you did what
we think you need to do and to manage
this disease looking at it from the
biology of the disease you will I I
think I wouldn't I would not be shocked
if we had a 50% reduction in so normally
you ask people what their dream
experiment would be but I'm I want to
ask you to I want to ask you this
question twice the first one the first
time I'll ask you this question will be
the easier one because it'll be the
clinical trial so what would be the
dream clinical trial to test the
hypothesis that says we can reduce the
mortality of cancer by 50% what what
would you want to put head-to-head to
definitively what we do right now is if
we do metabolic therapy at all okay if
we do it at all it's either standard of
care versus standard of care plus
metabolic therapy we're missing the crew
the critical control group metabolic
therapy without standard of care what
are we doing so tell me what the
experiment would be let's let's use
breast cancer as okay breast cancer you
so you have your standard whatever
you're doing today a lot of people dying
of breast cancer with metastatic breast
cancer so we're gonna now take metabolic
therapy and we're gonna combine it with
standard of care which is what the group
and in Turkey and how is that how would
you integrate that let's talk about how
you would do it not necessarily have
it's being done how would you for the
purpose of the experiment integrate
standard of care patient
we use the chemo that man we would have
people on on metabolic therapy which
would be lowering you would do those in
parallel you would have some patients
that would be treated only with the
standard of care which which would be
our guest row and then we would have
people treated with the standard of care
plus reducing blood sugar elevating
ketones and targeting the energy
metabolism which we contend would that
include things like metformin CA other
things like it could it could include
America accent yes yes that's what we're
doing in Turkey so it's basically
standard however in Turkey we're doing
the lowest dose of chemo that we can use
to still be in compliance with the with
the law and if you get rid of now the
control D and now your metabolic therapy
alone group metabolic therapy alone what
would that group that group would be
press pulse concept so we've down
regulate the glucose first shrink the
tumor up make the microenvironment less
inflamed less angry then we specifically
tell me what would be in that so you
would these patients would be on
ketogenic diet first we'd blower their
blood sugar gradually depending on the
status of the individual so you'd go
into lowering their blood sugar
elevating their key putting them to
therapeutic ketosis essentially so a lot
of these people also have a multiple
other series of metabolic abnormalities
they have type 2 diabetes they've got
you know triglyceride emia they have all
kinds of other things besides having
cancer so basically by by bringing them
into a state of therapeutic ketosis you
know how do you define that is that
defined by the amount of glucose and
ketone just by the glucose ketone index
that we published we published a paper
on and what what's the ratio this ratio
about close to 1.0 or below if we can if
we can get it this is where the
millimolar of ketone and the millimolar
of glucose are about the same and that
people hit that somewhere between 3 & 4
I'm guessing it days after no 3 to 4
millimoles tends to be the place where
they're about the same it could be it
could be you know it depends on the
individual because that some people have
higher glucose higher ketones and yet
they still have the same ratio so some
people have you know very low glucose
and not that high of a ketone but it
gives them the same ratio so so the
issue is get your rig the only time I've
been able to be at one-to-one is when
I'm not eating anything
yeah well it's variable from one person
to the next and then the other thing too
we have to be very
careful about there's a lot of cancer
patients very hard to get into one
you're a young healthy guy guys that are
young and healthy can get well below one
women are better than men
we've done some studies so basically but
cancer patients are freaked out because
they have anxiety and anxiety elevates
corticosteroids at you you have a
tougher time bringing here so we also
Institute with with the press
besides ketone supplementation is domme
D'Agostino who's been telling and the
ketogenic diet and then we have stress
management which includes music therapy
yoga therapy there's a variety of ways
to reduce emotional stress and that's a
very important part of the management
you have to let the patient know that
their disease is not terminal that
they're lowering of the stress is going
to make the medicine and the work so
once we get the patient into metabolic
ketosis now we have options now we can
start using insulin therapy to bring the
blood Sugar's down lower we can put them
into hyperbaric oxygen which creates
oxidative stress predominantly in the
tumor cell and not in the normal cells
the normal cells are burning ketones
that reduces oxidative stress when you
say insulin therapies do you mean actual
insulin yeah we're testin that now the
Germans used to do that years ago but we
don't think we have to put people into
metabolic comas to do this we think we
can do it without it we're testing it
now so I'm I'm working on it now as we
speak we have these experiments going
next door so so the question is you
don't want to use insulin therapy unless
you're in therapeutic ketosis you don't
want to go into a hyperbaric chamber
unless you're in therapeutic ketosis and
then we would pulsed with drugs that
target glutamine and together you're
removing the in the antioxidant capacity
of the tumor making it vulnerable to
hyper Baraka how much can these drugs
lower local levels of glutamine enough
to slaughter the tumor cells but what I
don't know enough about this is that a
50% reduction that's necessary to do
that we we're getting about a 50%
reduction in glucose based on Europeans
we want to get lower the glucose even
further because you can do that and with
ketones correction with target and
glutamine it's got to be pulsed because
you can't chronically reduce glutamine
to the availability to the physiology
acutely how much do you lower it we can
lower quite effectively we can shut it
and well don't forget the cancer cell is
absolutely dependent on this fuel the
normal cells get they can burn the
ketones also so they're not
gonna be energy deprived completely
whereas the tumor cell will be deprived
energy completely are there some cancer
cells that preferentially utilize
ketones no cancer cell can use ketones
you have to have a good mitochondria and
a cancer cell that would have some
oxidative capacity a small amount of
oxidative capacity could burn some
ketones but most can't most of the most
aggressive cancer cells can't burn
ketones because their mitochondria
defective that you need a good might or
that's why it's a selective it selects
for enhancing the vitality of the normal
cell while putting the cancer cell at a
competitive disadvantage so this is the
ketones are not to kill cancer cells
they to provide the normal cells with a
fuel as an alternative to glucose that
the tumor cells can't use the ketones
and if there many experiments like this
you can't if you take Keith the cancer
cells and grow them in a dish without
glucose and glutamine just ketones they
die but normal cells don't the normal
cells can survive on the ketones without
the glucose and glutamine so it's very
clear that the tumor cells can't use in
the end and I said that you have to have
a good mitochondria to do this so so
we're selectively marginalizing these
tumor cells because of their metabolic
in capabilities but it has to be done
strategically over time and where does
the hyperbaric oxygen fit in is that
part of the pulse obviously yeah that's
a pulse therapy and what how much
hyperbaric what we want to try to
replace radiation therapy with
hyperbaric oxygen because the mechanisms
of cell death will be very so many
atmospheres we do it at two-and-a-half
atmospheres for how long well we were
doing it for 90 minutes every day you
know something like this so it you know
it's it's designed to put metal
oxidation stress killing the tumor cells
by oxidative stress the same way a
radiation therapy would work okay
radiation a lot of times doesn't work
because the cells are in a hypoxic
environment all right so why are they in
such a hypoxic environment because
they're fermenting all right they're
blowing out all this fermentable fuels
into the waste products got to clean
that all up that micro environment has
to be brought back to a normal state and
therapeutic ketosis we published several
papers showing that it's a tant powerful
anti-inflammatory therapy it makes the
micro environment less inflamed it's
pro-apoptotic it's anti-angiogenic so
you're killing all these bad blood
vessels and replay
with normal blood vessels that the
normal cells will be able to use so it's
a it's it's reconfiguring the micro
environment while putting stress and
killing tumor cells now the tumor
becomes more and more vulnerable and now
it becomes more and more damaged by by
drugs that are going to chip away at the
surviving cells it's not something we're
gonna go in like a bull in a china shop
it's going to be a gradual degrading of
the tumor and and where does this
surgery take place here is the surgery
taking place before all of this happens
no the surgery would take place at some
midpoint okay the midpoint would be
where the surgeon now looks at the tumor
and says I can take care of this it's
not going to be a diffuse mass it's not
gonna be an angry inflamed thing well
you have to cut out half the guys : in
order to get what you think is the part
of the cancer that's it no this thing
will be now much more shriveled we've
seen it it's much less angry it's at
micro it's more demarcated you can see
it on this end the histological slides
you can see what the hell happened to
this tumor how come it's um it's smaller
how come it's more
the margins are more sharply defined
because you took away the inflammation
that was being driven by the
fermentation fuels so you shrinking this
tumor down now the surgeon comes in and
can potentially cure these people that
would be maybe not curable in the past
so this is why I'm saying we can reduce
the death rate by 50% if you view the
tumor as a metabolic problem rather than
a genetic problem the gene mutations are
all downstream epiphenomena red herrings
even vogelstein who still claims that
this is a bird vogelstein from Jonah
he still claims it's a genetic disease
but we're never going to cure the
disease by targeting the genes as too
many mutations to all this kind of stuff
but we can do that with metabolic
therapy we can actually eliminate the
cancer based on metabolic therapy it's a
process who's trained to do this no one
I mean we need physicians to be trained
to do this what they're been used to
trained to give dose of high doses of
radiation without killing the patient or
poisoning these poor people with drugs
that are very toxic and keeping them
alive so you don't die from the from the
treatments this is absurd why are you
using radiation and chemo in the first
place what we have to stop proliferation
okay well we if they can't generate
energy they're going to stop liberating
is they gonna die
what is the experiment
the clinical trial that you're involved
in in Turkey that you've alluded to you
yeah so what we what we do my colleagues
in Turkey do is they use chemo but they
use the lowest possible dose is it for
breast cancer all cancers in fact the
results are the same all cancers are the
same disease they're all fermenters so
once you knew that they're all dependent
on these two fuels then all you have to
do is target the two fuels to put them
at risk for elimination the question is
how can you target the fuels without
harming the rest of the body and that's
the press pulse concept so we know we
can press things constantly without
harming the body but we have to pulse
the glutamine issue because we don't
want to deprive our normal immune system
and gut systems of the very fuel needed
to provide normal physiology and those
tissues so this is why we have to pulse
the glutamine issue
how many glutamine drugs are there well
this sums coming all the time but the
one that works the best for us is Donna
are there any that are in clinical
trials in the United States yeah there's
a couple is there's a name there's a few
names of them you know they're they
target various aspects of the glute
ammonolysis pathway the problem is we
have a drug that's called it's a dirty
drug it hits multiple pathways of
glutamine metabolism and it seems to
work better than all the other drugs at
least from our perspective so far which
drug is done this is done the the six
Norden or leucine it was used in
clinical trials years ago but it was
partially effective but they weren't
targeting they weren't doing the full
metabolic approach if you don't do all
the parts of the problem you're not
you're gonna the horse is going to get
out it's it's still not going to be
effective and today no one anywhere on
the planet is doing the kind of a
therapy that we think need to do to make
to make this all work
now this bit Simmons's on what are the
drugs they're in current clinical trials
that are targeting glutamine well
there's a B EPTs I believe an acronym
for another very complicated structure
and then there's a they're making gone
analogs that are supposedly less toxic
what we find is with the ketogenic diet
Don becomes far less toxic so you can
actually use you can use far lower doses
so I was talking to somebody the other
day is it better to wait for a
pharmaceutical company to build a new
drug to target answer or is it better to
develop a way in which a previously very
effective drug could be less toxic and
both of them become at the end result is
the same you're going to get something
that's going to work far better than
than what was previously available
so how many clinics in the country in
the world are treating cancer as a
metabolic disease using a strategy that
will take away the two prime fermentable
fuels for the disorder and the answer is
no one no one no one's doing this but
about this trial in Turkey is doing this
well they're not targeting the glutamine
so they're doing they're doing these
other processes but so it's it's the
glucose the ketones the hyperbaric
oxygen
yeah but not pulsing with glutamine not
the anti gluten not doing the glutamine
nobody's doing the glutamine we tried
doing that in our Egyptian patient that
we published recently we use chloroquine
and we used EGCG which is a green tea
extract but they're not they're not as
powerful in the clinic now that poor guy
he just passed away we were devastated
by this we published the paper he lived
30 months which is far longer than most
people with a glioblastoma he was doing
really well on metabolic therapy we
pushed off the standard of care for 3
months so we did surgery after three
weeks of therapeutic ketosis debulk the
tumor most of it because you never get
well GBM and then we didn't we didn't do
we were forced into the radiation
therapy after three months even though
the guy was doing remarkably well so
this is a so we said why are we radiant
when we have to because as part of the
stand even and he just was in alexandria
egypt and then a year later he starts
developing or it was six or eight months
later he starts developing a headache
his head starts to swell and they did a
compression debulking and they found the
look at the tissue they were named tumor
cells he was dying from radiation
necrosis that he took from the radiation
so this is why I'm very much against I
think we're not going to make any major
advance in brain cancer until we stop by
radiating people with the brain because
you're creating a bigger problem and
this is leading to the demise of all
these poor patients the survival after
radiation is almost zero so and that's
in my mind it's becoming because doing
in part to the radiation that would give
into these people so whether they're
dying from the tumor or radiation
necrosis they're going to be dying they
shouldn't be doing that in the first
place so the standards of care have to
be dramatically changed in order to
improve overall survival so when I say
we can drop death rates by 50% in ten
years we're not only dropping death
rates we're massively increasing overall
so
and quality of life at the same time so
I have a lot of anecdotal information
with people who have been treated with
metabolic therapy part of it they're
living far longer the quality of life is
much better and when they die they die
in a very peaceful way and this but some
of my clinician friends have been
telling me this these guys that are in
these metabolic therapies the quality of
life is really good up until about two
weeks before they died whereas the
people do on standard of care never live
as long and their quality of life is
horrific they're living they're there
they're there
do you think that metabolic therapies
are offered the potential for cure or
just another therapeutic option because
if you want to reduce the death rate by
50% it there's no lead time bias /
therapeutic extension that's gonna do
that that is that is a paradigm shift in
cure not treat I think it's both I think
you're going to be able to extend
dramatically overall survival you're
going to improve dramatically quality of
life and how do we know if we're cured
the issue is is that if you die from a
heart disease at 85 and you had cancer
when you were when you were 50 a
tournament so called a terminal disease
I mean I think we could pick something
simpler than that right if you are ten
years disease-free - a first order
approximation you're cancer-free right
if you had colon cancer ten years ago
and you know ten years later you die of
a heart attack I think it's safe to say
you died of heart disease even if on a
autopsy they find dormant cancer cells
well you know here's a situation if you
take standard of care and you live ten
years and or like you said and you drop
dead of a heart attack something that is
that heart attack was that heart attack
the result of the cancer or the
treatment you gotta also have to put
into into perspective what effect does
the treatments have on your overall
long-term survival as well right so
dana-farber down here just opened up a
branch of medicine called cancer
survivor medicine it appears that many
people treated with standards of care
are suffering from horrific Lee from all
these other kinds of diseases they never
had but for the fact that they were
treated with all this toxic stuff so we
would eliminate that why would you if
you're in therapeutic ketosis and you're
doing unlikely but I'm still like what's
the proof of concept that the metabolic
therapy can lead to a cure so
is your hypothesis that this gentleman
in Alexandria if he hadn't been if he
hadn't undergone radiation for the GBM
your belief is he could have actually
had a cure I don't know because we we
can't know like you said we'd have to
wait 10 years you know to know that so
if we were to institute an aggressive
metabolic program for managing cancer
but it seems GBM would be the place to
do it right because it's you know it
unfortunately is such a uniformly fatal
cancer and it's fatal because of the
treatment that they're giving these this
combination of the of what they're doing
to the patient as well as the tumor the
problem clinically right is that the
mass effect doesn't give you a lot of
flexibility to delay surgery so between
corticosteroids and radiation when a
patient most patients present with gdm
not it not GBM not as incidental
findings they have symptoms from the
Mass Effect so we have to be sympathetic
to the clinicians in the conventional
pathway who are saying look I got Bob
here he's complaining he's got you know
Hemi paralysis and yet he's got a GBM
the idea that we're gonna wait a month
to put him on a ketogenic diet when I
need to either cut that thing out now or
radiate him or or put him on
corticosteroids so so in other words
there's AB is gonna be a very difficult
thing to study well it's a judgment call
on the part of the neurosurgeon okay so
he looks at the data do we have a
watchful waiting period this is I have
spoken many neurosurgeons by their blood
of my friends I said what's the stat
what do we do here
he said a tional e if you have brain
herniation possibility the patient be
dead in a week we don't do the bulking
that patient has to be the bulk all
right but you don't have to give them
steroids you can just do the bulking
steroids will shrink the edema of the 3
and what would be the most evil in your
mind
meaning metabolically evil the radiation
the corticosteroid or the surgery Oh
clearly the steroids and the radiation
so that surgery that every GBM patient
should go and have the resection and
then undergo metabolic therapy even
though they're not technically going to
be free of disease yeah I think I think
this is a the strategy the watch will
how long the watchful waiting period is
will give the neurosurgeon an
opportunity to do a greater debulking
and there's a hundred articles in the
literature showing that the law you'll
live longer on to bulking the more you
can do bulk the tumour so if we can
shrink the tumor down like we did to the
Egyptian people ate at three weeks we
put him under incredible therapeutic
fasting water only 900 ketogenic diet
they did a very awake good 900 900
calories kilocalories yeah but not water
only you said water for the first three
days water oh I see and then we did
transition to him he did an awake
craniotomy it was done done very well
then we pushed off the radiation therapy
for three months and then they did well
and we didn't want to do that because I
think the tumor was looking really good
he had a correction of the midline shift
he was he was he was in good shape so I
think he suffered from the radiation I
think he didn't survive because of the
radiation treatment do you think that
GBM would be the best histology to study
this in oh yeah because it's as you said
the survival is you're gonna see a
signal if one's there yeah so and and
then I've spoken to a lot of my friends
who think that okay we have to debulk
immediately then we're going to go on
metabolic therapy we we can push it off
for two weeks and then do metabolic
therapy the thing we have to do is we
have to eliminate radiation I think
radiation is part of the big biggest
part of the problem I think when you do
if you're doing metabolic therapy you
should eliminate radiation right away I
have no doubt about this is absolutely
in my mind a problem and this is one of
the reasons why there's so few people
surviving it's because you are radiating
this if you didn't radiate you could
survive a lot longer I think with a
metabolic therapy you can double triple
the amount of survival how do we know
this because those patients that I know
who rejected radiation and chemo took
surgery after two years a year are doing
well they're out for years so clearly
they're with which histologies GBM
there's a GBM patients alive yes at four
years yes Pablo Kelly in fact I'm gonna
be there next week he's gonna be sitting
in the audience is this published no
it's not published but the guy has all
the documentation it's just that it's
not yet published why because we I
haven't I haven't sat down and wrote it
up yet what would be more important than
writing that up writing another paper up
that I thought the guy was going to live
just as long but he wasn't
look that guy was one guy alive three
years if you have a cohort of patients
that have been alive for four years with
GBM I don't know what would be more
important than delay I don't know of
anything more important either but you
don't figure we should stop this podcast
now you can start writing that up well
I'll talk to you in fact he's gonna be
giving a lecture after my lecture
because that's I mean that's really
where you want to be able to generate
interest on a clinical trials okay so
how many people he's a young guy 25
years old he says I don't want radiation
I want kid I don't want chemo I don't
want any of that stuff I don't want
surgery he says oh you're gonna be dead
in three to six months this was they
told him it's all in the news it was in
the newspapers
I gave him the stuff on the metabolic
therapy I didn't know he was gonna live
that long I thought he was just gonna
live a few extra months he comes back
and he says I'm still alive and there's
a big newspaper article in the British
newspapers about this guy who rejects
all so after two years he decides to let
me that he had an inoperable
glioblastoma that now became operable
after metabolic therapy so they debunked
it and now after another year he's he
doesn't have any to him I left and he
never had radiation he never had chemo
he had surgery very delayed and they did
a histological analysis after the
debulking said yes you did have a GBM
because what a lot of people say if you
live that long
GBM it's the problem it's just
that you I mean what you're creating a
situation that leads to the demise of
those very people that you are trying to
get to help and the and when you'e
radiate the brain you free up massive
amounts of of glutamine by breaking the
glutamine glutamate cycle so those tumor
cells are sucking down massive amounts
of glutamine and then you give the
steroids to reduce the edema which then
elevates the blood sugar so I was going
to give you two experiments to dream
experiments so the second one would be
going back to sort of the more
fundamental premise of this which is
what if resources were you know no
constraint how could one unambiguously
make the case slash test the hypothesis
that despite structural abnormalities in
the mitochondria the production of
lactate and the fermentation is not
purely for respiratory compensation in
other words we talk
about this idea that says you can have a
structural deficit but still be
functionally good enough how could that
hypothesis be tested cuz that seems to
be one of the central arguments here
well I mean there's several ways we look
at this if a cell can live with ketones
without glucose and glutamine you'd
obviously have some mitochondrial
function that would keep them alive
because they wouldn't be able to firm it
but let's like we're in a resource
unconstraint world so what are the dream
experiments well that we would test that
well we have humans you know I mean in
vivo ba because a lot of these
mechanisms would be tested in vitro
because you can't do those kinds of
experiments but the metabolic therapy
that we have designed Dom D'Agostino
myself
Joel maroon who's the team surgeon for
the Pittsburgh Steelers nurse a
neurosurgeon George Yeo is a who's a
prostate oncologist prostate cancer
oncologist we all sat down and we built
this press pulse therapy okay so if you
if you deprive the tumor cells of their
fermentable fuels and and you killed and
you essentially eliminate you know I
can't detect any more cancer in your
body that's based on the biology of what
the problem is all right so the dream
experiments to are to ferret that out
mechanistically in vitro so to prove
that this is the case and we're doing
that right now when we target these
things these cells die so you can put
them in and when normal cells wouldn't
die so clearly what's going on here I
mean it was shown in many papers in fact
they're back in the 30s and 40s
beautiful papers showing that the
respiratory system of tumor cells is
massively compromised okay if that's the
case then they they they're surviving on
fermentation there's no other known
biological system in the world that can
provide alternative ATP but yet most
people don't agree with that statement
so that's what I'm asking is what
experiment could take the debate out of
that very well we're in course okay so
they don't they don't believe it if I
look at the data and you look at the
data and we both come to the same
conclusion and this other guy looks at
the same data and he says I don't
believe it
then it tells me the data are not
convincing enough if everybody's acting
in good faith well then you have to ask
about what's what's good faith if I have
or what's better okay look at here's the
way I look at it if science is a human
activity okay there are people who say
things that are not true and everybody
believes it right right all right so I
look at something and but I don't
refrain from making all political jokes
yeah right now right I understand but I
understand completely but but the issue
here of course is that you have it's one
thing to say okay I we had a review on a
paper that that we know there's a
massive biology on the role of
cardiolipin and controlling the electron
transport chain I mean there's dozens
and dozens of papers on this molecular
biology I don't believe it
well what don't you believe what what
part of this massive amount of
scientific evidence that you don't
believe I'm unfamiliar with cardiolipin
therefore it can't be right well that's
not the reason to discount the right
right and when you write the paper up
why would you not cite Peterson's
massive compendium of evidence saying
mitochondria are abnormal and you say
mitochondria sysm is normal well how
does that how does that jive with the
massive amounts of evidence to say
that's not do you what I tried to do in
all my writings I never try to ignore an
alternative fact to what I'm saying I
tried to say there is a fact that I'm
not yet completely clear about but I'm
not going to ignore it okay you'll find
in the scientific literature today in
the top journals that they're ignoring
massive evidence that don't support
their position and that's what's it
that's one of the problems and like you
know we were saying that this problem in
cancer all these top journals cell
science nature you know 50% of them up
to 50% of the article can't be
reproduced in other people's labs this
is a crisis in the field what's going on
here so you're ignoring massive evidence
that doesn't fit your particular mindset
so you'll just discount it I don't think
it's any different than the geocentric
heliocentric model of the of the solar
system the Catholic Church refused to
believe that the earth was not the
center of the solar system despite all
the evidence that said it was they just
refused to believe it we have the exact
same thing in the cancer field you have
massive evidence showing that the
mitochondria are structurally and
functionally dysfunctional I know
want to believe it what what what what
can you do about that what can you do
about that when you have the evidence to
show that and you choose not to choose
to ignore it is that any different than
the heliocentric geocentric system that
we had the difference today is that we
have 16 yeah I mean it's slightly
different right but I don't get no
justice it's a fact you have fact yeah
and don't forget that yeah but I think
the Catholic Church was you know
basically relying on a religious
framework
he has their counter argument of and
Lursa their belief system was formed by
something different I think in the
scientific yeah but when Galileo said
please look through the telescope to
document that Copernicus was right they
didn't want to look at the telescope
they didn't want to look in the
telescope yeah so because it would
disrupt their worldview if you've just
thought I think I think that's a fair
that's a first date yeah I guess again I
come back to this through the lens of
I'd love to know what the experiments
are that cuz I view it as a stalemate if
you're looking at a body of literature
and they're looking at a different body
of literature and every time everybody
looks at everybody else's body of
literature they say well there's an
alternative explanation for this then
we're making no progress the answer to
me is collaborate generate new
experiments where you know that's why I
think knowing the biology of the disease
as well as I think I do and we never can
know completely everything because every
human being is a different entity you're
dealing with a different entity if we
can if we can increase overall survival
and improve quality of life massively
advanced to what we're doing today
because we used a strategy based on what
we understand to be the biological
problem and the results support that
then I think that's the advanced and
glioblastoma would be a wonderful so
speaking of that realistically when do
you think that case report of the these
four years surviving cohorts will be
published I'm going to try it when I
talk to him over there I'd like to speak
to the very physicians that actually
took the data from him from the from
Pablo because so many patients are in
that cohort by just him oh there's just
one guy who survived for you well one
guy because he rejected no I understand
I thought I misunderstood there were
several patient well this Andrew
Scarborough who initiated a first couple
of rayon said no more of this
he took no radiation no chemo he's still
going he had a stage three astrocytoma
which is also quite lethal
then there's Alison ganic she's on the
on the news she has a website saying
that she survived GBM without this I
have other key anecdotal reports based
on what people have told me one poor guy
they wanted to he had no money no
insurance so they didn't say he they
they didn't want a grade because they
wouldn't get any they wouldn't be able
to reach any revenue from this guy he he
just did the ketogenic diets way back
before even I was talking about it and
he's still alive 16 years so so there
but what was the did they eventually do
surgery on him they did surgery but but
they didn't do anything else but so what
is it so again these are anecdotal but
with Pablo we have data we have clear
data from him so it's not it's not like
we don't have data from him you know we
have a lot of things a lot of these
things people would say well you can't
do this you can't you can't do what what
I'm asking you to do because it breaks
the it violates the standard of care
okay the standard of care should never
have been written in granite it should
be flexible if you have something else
that comes along that might be better
you think there would be an enthusiasm
no we have not seen that we try to get
this through the University of
Pittsburgh to try to do this the
advisory board right this what are the
IRB the IRB refused okay so they would
only might consider metabolic therapy
after standard of care fail what's the
aim of care fails all the time why don't
you try metabolic therapy as an
alternative to stay on no we can't do
that why well because we can't do that
why because we can't do that that means
there's inflexibility so we're up
against firewalls you have two firewalls
after firewalls to try to change the way
we continue we're doing all the gene
screening mounting to nothing because
cancer is not a genetic disease so we
have all these firewalls that are
preventing us from moving forward the
way I think we need to be moving forward
for a GBM patient what do they have to
lose there was a paper that just came
out the other day and from out of
British Columbia Canada looking at
carefully looking a survival for GBM
they said is woefully similar to the
1926 Bailey and Cushing paper for
chrissake I mean what's going on here
you mean in a hundred you almost 100
years John McCain size twelve months
that's no
different than if he had the cancer then
if he had the tumor in 1926 so that
tells us we have a serious serious
problem and I'm offering an alternative
that might be able to change that what
is wrong with that why why why would I
be attacked for something like this
right so you tell me hi I have to know
what's going on here why so I go up and
I say you can't irradiated brain oh you
got to do it radio here's my here's my
parting shot of advice Tom which is it's
worth nothing but your passion is
palpable I lost a friend to GBM so the
very first person in my life that I ever
knew the died of cancer died of a GBM
and I was with him almost until the day
he died and it was the saddest thing to
see the last year of his he lived 18
months and a year of it he didn't he
couldn't see so you know you talk about
it what does it like to be a 19 year old
kid who can't see anything and I look at
it's actually one of the saddest stories
I only want to tell it it's so upsetting
anyway I get it I think my advice would
be the following whatever you've been
doing a the phone rings what the hell
perfect time whatever you've been doing
is not getting through you got to do
something different right so there's
there's a quote by someone who's
escaping me it's like the definition of
insanity is doing the same thing over
and over again expecting a different
outcome you got to do something
different well I don't know what it is
but but I'm just saying try a new
approach don't forget a clinical trial
done yeah well you know
don't forget I'm a professor in an
academic non-medical school environment
right
so we ferret we we designed the
preclinical studies that allow the
clinicians to then adapt it to their
patient population so this is what
there's very we're the only one of the
only groups in the world that are
actually doing bench-to-bedside real
research because I have I have tentacles
for all these different clinical things
it's I get it and all I'm saying is yeah
the current your cure you're a budding a
resistance and I you've got to go around
it you've got it we got to find a way
you got to go around it and it might so
what was your and enough of these case
reports published that it becomes very
difficult to ignore and people would say
look you know here's a concession we're
gonna do surgery immediately and then
with metabolic therapy because I have a
very hard time saying no surgery no
corals no radiation I just don't think
that's a judgement call the part of the
clinician but I'm saying if you're if
you're willing to accept immediate
surgery but delaying or postponing
radiation and/or corticosteroid therapy
until they are necessary either due to
medical progression and or symptom
control you have a chance and so of
course the question then is you you've
got to find advocates on the other side
of this ledger meaning but the ledger
meaning in terms of the thinking about
this disease yeah well I agree with you
I met and so what would you suggest
what's the what's the and get what's the
roundabout what's your in the field I
mean you know I did a great discussion
over that scotch that you promised me
before we started this podcast we're
trying to do this and we need guys like
yourself and others to get the word out
that there are alternatives and that
who's gonna be the bold one and I know
I'm speaking to now people who want to
set up these special clinics special
kind of treatment clinics where we can
bring everything under the same roof so
you don't have to run over this place in
that place we take the patients this
will happen it will happen because
people want to live yeah look I mean
that was gonna be my if forced to give
one idea now cuz I don't I don't think I
know the answer but if I were gonna give
you one suggestion it would be do this
from a position of pull not push so
right now you are pushing this idea what
you really want to do is take a page out
of the Charlie foundation where they're
basically saying look in the end the
results were so dramatic that the
parents of the children a third of whom
now no longer suffer from epilepsy
another third of whom have at least a
50% reduction in epilepsy they basically
become the voice of reason and I think
that's a part of the reason today not
the only reason I think the data are so
good but I think they're a part of the
reason why today the only place in sort
of the traditional medical view where a
ketogenic diet is viewed as a legitimate
first-line therapy for you know
recalcitrant disease is in epilepsy now
I think there will be a day when that
expands so what I would I would I would
hope is that there's a a network of
people family members probably who have
lost people with two GBM who would would
become the ones that would be your
mouthpiece right would become the ones
that would say you know what I'm tired
of the fact that my loved one died in
nine months seemingly in vain and
there's this there's this body of
evidence which look admittedly at this
point is small and is uncertain but
nothing in science is certain but
they're offering an alternative I want
to know that that could be tested you
know the thing that it kills me on these
private foundations and things their
advisory boards are made up of
physicians that subscribe to the gene
theory of cancer so when the patients
and their advocates here's my second
piece of advice I know I said I wasn't
gonna give you any advice my second
piece of advice is you're fighting an
uphill battle you don't need to it it
could be a genetic disease and a
metabolic disease simultaneously I would
argue that cancer is when you think
about the three diseases the three
disease processes that are going to kill
all of us sitting right here right now
in this room it's gonna be a thorough
sclerotic disease neurodegenerative
disease or cancer but statistically
speaking that's how we're going to die
of those three I don't think there's any
that are more evolved and complicated
than cancer
I think cancer is by far the hardest of
those and therefore now there's where I
would disagree twelve good that's too
long a discussion point is whether you
agree with me or not let's argue the
following or let me state the following
and or posit the following it's a very
evolved condition and therefore you
could have genetic pressures metabolic
pressures immune pressures that all
predispose to it so I don't think it has
to be an either/or
I think metabolic therapies could be
valuable whether or not the genetic
ideas of cancer are right or wrong so so
to me it strikes me as an unnecessary
fight right instead the answer should be
look we should have medical oncologists
radiation oncologist surgical oncologist
immuno oncologists and metabolic
oncologists period that's now you might
argue those radiation oncologists are
causing more harm than good that's
beyond my paygrade you might be right
but you're basically arguing for a fifth
branch of oncology which is the medical
oncologist above the three that we
conventionally have I think the immuno
oncologist is coming into his or her own
right now I don't think it's worth
arguing about whether it's a genetic
disease or metabolic disease it's just a
goddamn hard disease and we need every
therapy imaginable and sometimes that
will be doing things that are completely
new as you've proposed so anyway that's
on that note I want to thank you very
much for your generosity of time and and
just your passion for this and and and
sort of how tirelessly you've worked on
this I mean I've this is only our first
time meeting today Tom but I've been
familiar with your work for probably
eight years now which is a small
fraction of the amount of time you've
put into this DOM is a very close friend
and so through DOM and through Bob I've
learned a lot more about your work and I
know that a lot of people listening to
this are going to be rooting for you to
do this is there anything that someone
who's listening to this who's got a
loved one who's either died of GBM or
has GBM that they can do to increase the
chances that either others can get the
types of therapies you're talking about
in clinical trials or that their loved
ones themselves can what what else can
we do I mean in my position as a
researcher who does the preclinical
studies I mean we get support from
Travis from foundation you know the
metabolic therapy foundation and that's
what keeps our program going and that's
what tells us what we think should work
really well or what might not work to
help these people get the outcome that
they want which is mm-hmm
high quality of life and living a lot
longer so we that's what that's my big
thing is is that and as we can identify
those and where do you do that you need
funds for that the federal government is
mostly like what gene is involved so
this is where it comes back to the same
problem again you don't get funding for
things that actually can really work
versus studying the disease let's look
at the minimum let's study the disease
more we don't need it we know we have a
pathway but is there an easy path for
patients who want to make financial
contributions to the lab is it through a
foundation that there's two ways to do
it you could either do it through the
foundation because we have a continual
grant set up through single cost single
cure found
okay so we'll link to that make sure
that people know what that and also at
Boston College it like if you want to
fund the work directly through the
University okay it has to be through a
very specific statement okay otherwise
the university will absorb it absorb
some of the other funds so basically
that's the way now that what we do then
is our me a data are immediately given
to the clinical people who then put it
on their patients and then feed me back
and say this is working well or we don't
think this is doing as well as we should
wanted you tweaked it in this direction
so I work with the physicians directly
and I give them the pre clinical
information they feed me back and see
how it's working sometimes it works a
hell of a lot better in the human than
the mouse so let's be sure that we have
from you any and all means that people
who are passionate about this interested
in this either personally or through
sort of indirect experience can can
support this work and and more
importantly I think create maybe a bit
of a groundswell that puts a little bit
of pressure on the IR B's to say look
this is you know GBM is as high-stakes
as it gets right it's the type of cancer
that gives cancer a bad name and maybe
this is one area where we have to
increase our appetite for risk in
clinical trials I agree with that and I
think that this is a disease that we
think we can make major advances in and
why not want to give it a shot
because it's not going to hurt anybody
it's not gonna accelerate their demise
it's only good well I mean I would
disagree with that only to in terms of a
talking point to say it could we don't
know but that's the that's the point of
risk right I mean when the outcome is so
asymmetrically bad which is uniform
death yeah in in an accelerated fashion
we have to be willing to take the risk
of potentially doing worse than that I
don't think that's the case
understood but but I think the way we
talk about this when we talk about this
as though there's no risk I think that
gives I think that reduces our
credibility of with people who say well
how can you say well well no we're any
any open cranial surgery produces risk
yeah that's and that's gonna be a part
of every of all the all what we're doing
well the point is I you know Bob's heard
me rail on this many a time the the note
this is a sort of idiotic idea of a
Hippocratic oath which is technically he
didn't even say it and it's such a dumb
thing anyway
do no harm I mean you you couldn't do
any good if you weren't at least willing
to do some harm no one goes into it do
it wanting to do harm but anyway this
has been really exciting and I and I
really appreciate your your time and
your insights and above all else the
work you've done so thank you Tom thank
you you can find all of this information
and more at Peter Tiye MD com forward
slash podcast there you'll find the show
notes readings and links related to this
episode you can also find my blog and
the nerd Safari at Peter thea MD com
what's a nerd Safari you ask just click
on the link at the top of the site to
learn more maybe the simplest thing to
do is to sign up for my subjective lean
on lame once a week email where I'll
update you on what I've been up to the
most interesting papers I've read and
all things related to longevity science
performance sleep etc on social you can
find me on Twitter Instagram and
Facebook all with the ID Peter attea MD
but usually Twitter is the best way to
reach me to share your questions and
comments now for the obligatory
disclaimer this podcast is for general
informational purposes only and does not
constitute the practice of medicine
nursing or other professional healthcare
services including the giving of medical
advice and note no doctor-patient
relationship is formed the use of this
information and the materials link to
the podcast is at the user's own risk
the content of this podcast is not
intended to be a substitute for
professional medical advice diagnosis or
treatment users should not disregard or
delay in obtaining medical advice for
any medical condition they have and
should seek the assistance of their
health care professionals for any such
conditions lastly and perhaps most
importantly I take conflicts of interest
very seriously for all of my disclosures
the companies I invest in and/or advise
please visit Peter attea MD com forward
slash about
you